INSTITUT NATIONAL DE RECHERCHE EN INFORMATIQUE ET EN AUTOMATIQUE

Recasting MLF
Didier Le Botlan and Didier Rémy

N° 6228 — version 5
version initiale June 2007 — version révisée December 2008

ISSN 0249-6399

apport
de recherche

ISRN INRIA/RR--6228--FR+ENG

Thème SYM

Recasting MLF
Didier Le Botlan and Didier Rémy
Thème SYM — Systèmes symboliques
Projet Gallium
Rapport de recherche n° 6228 — version 5 — version initiale June 2007 — version révisée December 2008 —
71 pages

Abstract: The language MLF has been proposed as an alternative to System F that permits partial type
inference a la ML. It differs from System F by its types and type-instance relation. Unfortunately, the definition
of type instance is only syntactic, and not underpinned by some underlying semantics. It has so far only been
justified a posteriori by the type soundness result.
In this work, we revisit MLF following a more progressive approach building on System F. We argue that
System F is not a well-suited language for ML-style type inference because it fails to share some closely related
typing derivations. We solve this problem in Curry style MLF by enriching types with a new form of quantification
that may represent a whole collection of System-F types. This permits a natural interpretation of MLF types
as sets of System-F types and defining the instance relation as set containment of the interpretations. We also
give an equivalent syntactic definition of the type-instance, presented as a set of inference rules.
We derive a Church-style version of MLF by further refining types so as to distinguish between user-provided
and inferred type information. We show an embedding of ML in MLF and an encoding of System F into MLF.
Besides, as MLF is more expressive than System F, an encoding of MLF is given towards an extension of System F
with local binders.
Key-words: System F, MLF, Unification, Types, Graphs, Binders, Inference

Unité de recherche INRIA Rocquencourt
Domaine de Voluceau, Rocquencourt, BP 105, 78153 Le Chesnay Cedex (France)
Téléphone : +33 1 39 63 55 11 — Télécopie : +33 1 39 63 53 30

Recasting MLF
Résumé : Le langage MLF a été conçu comme une alternative au Système F permettant l’inférence partielle
de type à la ML. Il diffère du Système F par la nature de ses types et par sa relation d’instance sur les types.
Malheureusement, la définition de l’instance de type est purement syntaxique et n’est pas soutenue par une
sémantique sous-jacente. Jusqu’à présent elle n’a été justifiée qu’a posteriori par le résultat de correction.
Dans ce travail nous réexaminons MLF en suivant une approche plus progressive en s’appuyant sur le Système
F. Nous soutenons que le Système F n’est pas bien adapté pour l’inférence de type à la ML parce qu’il ne réussit
pas à factoriser des dérivations de typage étroitement reliées. Nous résolvons ce problème dans la présentation
de MLF à la Curry en enrichissant les types avec une nouvelle forme de quantification qui permet de représenter
une collection tout entière de types du système F. Cela conduit à une interprétation naturelle des types de
MLF comme des ensembles de types du système F et à en déduire la relation d’instance par inclusion des
interprétations. Nous donnons également une définition syntaxique équivalence de l’instance de type sous la
forme d’un ensemble de règles d’inférences.
Nous en dérivons une présentation à la Church de MLF en raffinant encore les types de façon à distinguer
l’information de type inférée de celle fournie par l’utilisateur. Le langage résultant est plus canonique que celui
initialement proposé. Nous montrons un plongement de ML dans MLF ainsi qu’un codage du Système F dans
MLF. De plus, comme MLF est plus expressif que le Système F, un codage de MLF est fourni vers une extension
du Système F avec des liaisons locales.
Mots-clés : Système F, MLF, Unification, Types, Graphes, Lieurs, Inférence

Recasting MLF

3

Contents
1 Introduction

3

2 An intuitive introduction to MLF
2.1 A generic Curry-style second-order type system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 iMLF: Curry-style MLF. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 eMLF: Church-style MLF. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10
10
14
15

3 i MLF, Curry-style MLF
3.1 Types and prefixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Interpretation of types and prefixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Syntactic versions of instance and equivalence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.4 Typing rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.5 System F as a subset of (Simple) iMLF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.6 Type soundness, by viewing iMLF as a subset of Flet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.7 Expressiveness and modularity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19
19
20
21
24
25
25
28

4 eMLF, Church-style MLF
4.1 Types, prefixes, and type relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 Terms, typing rules, and type soundness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 Translating System F into eMLF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.4 Embedding ML into eMLF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.5 Type-preserving program transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

30
30
34
37
42
44

5 Related works
5.1 Type inference for System F . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Embedding first-class polymorphism in ML . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.3 Comparison with (other presentations of) MLF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.4 Ongoing works around MLF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.5 Future works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

45
46
48
50
52
54

6 Conclusions

55

1

Introduction

The design of programming languages is often an area of difficult compromises. In the end, programming
languages must help programmers write correct, maintainable and reusable programs quickly. This implies, in
particular, that programming languages must be expressive, so as to write algorithms concisely and directly,
avoiding code duplication and acrobatic programming patterns, modular, so as to increase readability, to ease
code reuse and to be robust to small code changes, and typed. Types are indeed a key towards program
correctness, as they ensure, with very little overhead and without relying on the programmer’s skill, that a
certain class of errors will never occur at runtime; moreover most common and stupid programming mistakes
may so be trapped as type errors.
Simple types, and in particular ground types, are still in use in many languages such as Pascal, C, Java,
etc. to categorize values between basic values such as integers, strings, etc., named structured values, and functions. Most basic values and primitive functions have a unique ground type. However, higher-order functions,
which receive among their arguments other functions typically used to transform other arguments, are usually
polymorphic. That is, they work uniformly for a whole collection of ground types. Unfortunately, this property
cannot be described using simple types. As a result, higher-order functions must often be artificially specialized
to one or, worse, several instances, introducing duplication, worsening maintainability, and preventing code
reuse.
A well-known solution is of course parametric polymorphism, which extends simple types with type variables
that may be universally quantified. The simplest form of parametric polymorphism is known as ML-style polymorphism (Milner, 1978): quantifiers are limited to the outermost position of types and the use of polymorphism
is limited to definitions, as opposed to parameters of functions. For example, the application—the function that
RR n° 6228

4

Rémy & Le Botlan

takes two arguments and apply the first one to the second one—may be given type ∀(α, β) (α → β) → (α → β).
A whole collection of types obtained by instantiating universal variables by arbitrary types can thus be captured
as a single polymorphic type. In this view, types can be thought of as the set of all their instances, which makes
them about as easy to understand as simple types. This also eases type inference, as each well-typed program
may be characterized by a principal type, i.e. a type whose instances are exactly all types of the program.
ML-style polymorphism has been extremely successful for several decades and is still at the core of the most
widely used implementations of statically typed functional languages, such as OCaml or Haskell. The advantages
of parametric polymorphism over simple types are now widely recognized, as shown by its introduction in C#
and the language Java, version 5.
However, polymorphic higher-order functions sooner or later need themselves to be passed as arguments to
other functions.
Because of its limited form of polymorphism, ML is well suited for programming abstractions over known
data-structures, such as the fold iterator over lists, but it does not allow to abstract iterators over arbitrary
collections because it is not possible to write a function that visits a structure without knowing its constructors
exactly. Another related limitation is that the Church encoding of data-structures does not usually work in ML.
A crux of Haskell is the use of monads, but the lack of first-class polymorphism prevents the abstraction over
monads. This has motivated the introduction of arbitrary-rank polymorphism in Haskell (Jones and Shields,
2004b), but its limitation to predicative polymorphism is too restrictive and makes it inconvenient to use. While
row variable polymorphism allows for a rather expressive object-oriented programming style in OCaml, the lack
of polymorphic methods that sooner or later arise has motivated the introduction of a limited form of first-class
polymorphism, based on Poly-ML (Garrigue and Rémy, 1999). Unfortunately, it remains contrived and ad hoc.
Many situations where first-class polymorphism is useful have been described in the literature. For instance,
a series of examples in the context of Haskell are presented in (Peyton Jones et al., 2007). Many of these
particular cases are in fact similar and often involve in a way or another taking as argument a function that
is applied to heterogeneous data, hence that has to be polymorphic. One may still wonder how often such
situations arise. We believe that they are in fact unavoidable, for reasons explained below.
Perhaps, the most convincing and agreed limitations of ML is its inability to represent heterogeneous
collections—except via explicit tagging which then prevents their treatment in a uniform way. Indeed, the
other way to represent an heterogeneous collection is to give its elements an existential type of the form ∃α.τ ,
where in fact each element taken separately has a type of the form τ [τ ′ /α] (the type τ in which α has been replaced by τ ′ ) for some type τ ′ . Existential types are also needed to represent closures, i.e. delayed computations
that, for instance, are to be run on some remote computation server.
It is well-known that an expression a of existential type ∃α.τ may be encoded as the function λ(f ) f a taking
as argument an arbitrary polymorphic function f of type ∀(β) (∀(α) τ → β) → β, so that it can be applied to a
but ignoring the part of a that is to be hidden. We write ∀(α) τ for ∀-quantification of variable α in type τ . The
scope of α extends to the right as far as possible. The arrow → is right associative and of lower priority than
other type constructors such as the product ×. That is, ∀(α) τ × τ ′ → τ → τ ′ means ∀(α) ((τ × τ ′ ) → (τ → τ ′ )).
Quite interestingly, providing existential types as primitive does not alleviate but, on the contrary, reinforces
the need for passing polymorphic functions as arguments. Indeed, an expression a1 of existential type must
be opened before it can be used inside an expression a2 , which is usually written open a1 as x, β in a2 . The
type variable β stands for the witness of the existential type of a1 and its scope is the expression a2 . When
the body of a2 is parametrized over some function f received as argument, the program becomes of the form
λ(f ) open a1 as x, β in a2 where f is used in a2 , typically with a type that involves β. In order for β not to
escape from its scope, the function f must be polymorphic in some other variable that will be instantiated to
some type containing β.
Such examples require quantifiers to appear within types—here on the left-hand side of arrow types, but
more generally at any position within types. That is, polymorphic types should be treated as any other types,
which is called first-class polymorphism. System F, the second-order polymorphic λ-calculus, is the reference
for first-class polymorphism (Girard, 1972; Reynolds, 1974).
In Curry’s view, terms of System F are unannotated and types are left implicit, as in ML. However, as
opposed to ML, type inference for System F is undecidable (Wells, 1999). Moreover, System F does not have
principal types1 . That is, the types of an expression in a given typing context cannot be captured as the set
of all instances of a particular (principal) type. Of course, the notion of principal types depends on a suitable
definition of type instance.
1 Principal types should not be confused with principal typings (Wells, 2002).

INRIA

Recasting MLF

5

Therefore, in practice, one rather uses Church’s view, where source programs contain explicit type information, so as to make type checking straightforward and decidable. More precisely, function arguments come with
explicit type annotations and polymorphism is both explicitly introduced by type abstractions and explicitly
eliminated by type applications.
For example, the following function maps its argument—a list of pairs—to a list obtained by applying the
first coordinate of each pair to the second coordinate.
We write ∀(αα′ ) σ for ∀(α) ∀(α′ ) σ. We write λ(x) a for the function that maps x to the expression a. We
write Λα. a and a[τ ] for type abstraction and type application, respectively.
Assume we are given a function listmap of type ∀(αβ) (α → β) → list(α) → list(β), as well as the projections
fst and snd from pairs of respective types ∀(αβ) α × β → α and ∀(αβ) α × β → β.
Λα . Λβ . λ(pairlist : list((α → β) × α))
listmap [( α → β) × α] [β]
(λ(p : (α → β) × α) (fst [α → β] [α] p) (snd [α → β] [α] p))
pairlist
As illustrated by this example, explicit type information may be quite intrusive sometimes obfuscating and
often a pain to write and read, while most of this information is rather obvious from context. By contrast, the
very same example, written in ML, looks as follows:
λ(pairlist ) listmap (λ(p) (fst p) (snd p)) pairlist
Annotations in ML are unnecessary because the language enjoys full type inference. That is, polymorphism
is implicitly introduced and eliminated. This is made possible in ML because type inference does not have
to look for first-class polymorphic types, hence it never needs to guess polymorphism. On the opposite, type
inference in System F should also consider solutions where the argument of a function, e.g. p in the example
above, may have a polymorphic type, such as (∀(α) α × α → list(α)) × (∀(β) τ × τ ), where τ is a type that
may mention β. Finding all such solutions is undecidable in the general case. Hence, in System F, one must
also annotate programs that are typable in ML if only to say not to look for other types. While System F is
attractive for its expressiveness, its poor treatment of the common simple case has limited its use as the core of
a programming language, which indirectly benefited to the long life of ML dialects.
Searching for the grail. In the last two decades, considerable research has been carried out to reduce the
gap between ML and System F. Unfortunately, all solutions that have been proposed so far are unsatisfactory,
from both a theoretical and—worse—practical point of view. The problem has naturally been tackled from two
opposite directions.
Starting with System F, one may allow some type annotations to be omitted and attempt to rebuild them,
hopefully accepting more ML programs. One theoretically very attractive solution of this kind is to reduce
type inference to second-order unification (Pfenning, 1988). This approach does not need type annotations
at all, but still requires placeholders for type abstractions and type applications, which unfortunately, are not
very convenient to write. Furthermore, type inference remains undecidable, as it then amounts to secondorder unification. Other less ambitious approaches rely on local type information to rebuild omitted type
information (Pierce and Turner, 2000; Odersky et al., 2001), by contrast with unification which is based on
global computational effects. However, places where the user must provide type annotations are not always so
obvious (Hosoya and Pierce, 1999). Worse, these approaches appear to be fragile with respect to small program
transformations; moreover, all of them fail to type a significant subset of useful ML programs.
Conversely, starting with ML, polymorphic types can be embedded into first-class monomorphic types via
explicit injection and projection functions. This technique, known as boxed polymorphism (Rémy, 1994; Odersky
and Läufer, 1996) may be improved in several ways and has been implemented in both Haskell and ML. While it
is useful as a default solution, and acceptable when polymorphic types are used occasionally, the solution does
not scale up to intensive use of polymorphism.
In fact, all approaches have somehow assumed that the solution was to be found between ML and System F.
Indeed, in Church’s view, hence in theory, ML is a subset of System F. However, in practice, ML is implicitly typed
while System F is explicitly typed. This makes the previous comparison misleading—if not meaningless. Maybe
the solution lies outside of System F, as a more expressive type system that combines implicit let-polymorphism
with explicit second-order types.
Our main contribution is a proposal for a new type system, called MLF, that supersedes both ML and
System F, allows for simple, efficient, predictable, and complete type inference for partially annotated terms.
The language MLF has been introduced in previous works (Le Botlan and Rémy, 2003; Le Botlan, 2004), which
RR n° 6228

6

Rémy & Le Botlan

we shall below refer to as Full MLF to avoid ambiguity. In this work, we focus on a simplified version, here
called MLF for conciseness—or Shallow MLF when there is ambiguity. While Shallow MLF is less expressive than
Full MLF, it is still more expressive than both ML and System F, it retains interesting theoretical properties and
practical applications, and it has a significantly less technical and more intuitive presentation.
For another simplification, we first consider a Curry-style version of MLF, called2 iMLF. This implicitly
typed version requires an extension of System-F types with only flexible quantification, written ∀(α ≥ σ) σ ′ .
Remarkably, we may interpret types of iMLF as sets of System-F types. Roughly, ∀(α ≥ σ) σ ′ may be seen as the
collection of all System-F types τ ′ [τ /α] where τ ′ and τ range in the interpretation of σ ′ and σ, respectively. This
interpretation induces an instance relation on types. It can also be used to exhibit a translation of expressions
into a small extension of System F with local bindings. This shows that the additional expressive power of
MLF is theoretically small, although practically important as it increases modularity in an essential way. For
the sake of comparison, one may also consider a weaker version, called3 Simple MLF, that has exactly the same
expressiveness as System F. Although it retains most theoretical properties of MLF, it is no longer an extension
of ML and, as a result, has little practical interest.
Unsurprisingly, full type inference for iMLF is undecidable. We thus also devise a Church-style version of
F
ML , called4 eMLF, with optional type annotations. For the purpose of type inference we enrich types with
rigid quantification ∀(α ⇒ σ) σ ′ , which, in contrast with flexible bindings, indicates that the polymorphic type
σ cannot be instantiated. Rigid quantification may at first be viewed as a notation for representing inner
polymorphism σ ′ [σ/α] within type schemes. More importantly, it keeps track of sharing by distinguishing
between ∀(α ⇒ σ, α′ ⇒ σ) σ ′ and ∀(α ⇒ σ) σ ′ [α/α′ ], which is essential for type inference, as explained next.
Indeed, the MLF type system maintains a clear separation between polymorphism that can be inferred and
polymorphism that cannot (more precisely, that we choose not to infer).
Usual ML-style polymorphism belongs to the former category. It is represented by type schemes : the typing
of the body of let x = a in a′ is of the form x : σ ⊢ a′ : σ ′ for some type σ ′ to be inferred. That is, x is known
to have a polymorphic type σ while typing a′ . For instance, if a is λ(y) y, which we write id, then x is known
to have type ∀(α) α → α, which we write σid .
On the contrary, the type of x in λ(x) a belongs to the latter, and is represented by an abstract type while
typing a. The typing of the body is of the form (α ⇒ σ) x : α ⊢ a : σ ′ (1). That is, x is only known to have
an abstract type α, which is bound to σ in the prefix (α ⇒ σ), but which cannot be instantiated to σ or to
anything else5 . The binding (α ⇒ σ) can be discharged on the right of the typing judgement only when α does
not appear in the typing environment, as prescribed by the usual generalisation rule. As an example, if a is x,
then (1) becomes (α ⇒ σ) x : α ⊢ x : α. We may derive (α ⇒ σ) ⊢ λ(x) x : α → α and the binding (α ⇒ σ) may
now be discharged into ⊢ λ(x) x : ∀(α ⇒ σ) α → α. As a consequence (λ(x) x) ω † is typable without any type
annotation on x, where the identifier ω † stands for the function λ(y : σid ) y y. However, λ(x) x is not typable
with type ∀(α ⇒ σ, α′ ⇒ σ) α → α′ , as this would have required typing (α ⇒ σ, α′ ⇒ σ) x : α ⊢ x : α′ (2), which
does not hold.
Conversely, the type of an annotated argument belongs to the former category. The typing of a in λ(x : σ) a
involves a judgment of the form x : σ ⊢ a : σ ′ . The annotation is intuitively discharged as ⊢ λ(x : σ) a : σ → σ ′ .
However, this is not quite correct because type schemes may not appear under arrow types: instead, we write
⊢ λ(x : σ) a : ∀(α ⇒ σ, α′ ⇒ σ ′ ) α → α′ . For example, we have x : σ ⊢ x : σ, and therefore, ⊢ λ(x : σ) x :
∀(α ⇒ σ) ∀(α′ ⇒ σ) α → α′ . Here, the type α′ of the result, and the type α of the argument are decoupled,
which is possible since the known type of x is σ and not a type variable abtracting σ.
The problem of type inference with partial type annotations is to find for a program, given with some type
annotations, the set of all its types that respect the type annotations. In eMLF, solvable type inference problems
have principal solutions, which indeed depends on the program type annotations—as illustrated above by the
two versions of the identity function that differ only on their type annotations.
The richer types and the let-polymorphism of eMLF make it significantly superior to Church-style System F
as a programming language: programs admit more general types and require fewer type annotations. More
precisely, removing all type abstractions and type applications from a term of System F, leaving only type
annotations on function parameters produces a term that is well-typed in eMLF and with a more general type
than its original type in System F—modulo a straightforward translation of types. Moreover, annotations on
2 The i stands for implicit.
3 Simple MLF was called Restricted MLF in (Le Botlan and Rémy, 2003; Le Botlan, 2004).
4 The e stands for explicit.
5 In the case where σ is a monotype τ , as in ML, α can be equivalently replaced by τ in x : α (indeed, monotypes can be inferred).

INRIA

Recasting MLF

7

function parameters may often be omitted. Precisely, only those that are used polymorphically need to be
annotated. In particular, ML programs need no type annotations.
Although type inference is not addressed in this paper, it can be reduced to a first-order unification algorithm
for (a form of) second-order types, combined with let-polymorphism a la ML, as shown in previous works by
Le Botlan and Rémy (2003) and Le Botlan (2004). While worst-case complexity is at least as hard as in ML,
i.e. exponential-time complete, it seems to be quite reasonable in practice. In fact, type inference for MLF has
recently been shown to be as efficient as for ML (Rémy and Yakobowski, 2008a; McAllester, 2003).
Notice that both iMLF and eMLF are typed languages, of equivalent expressiveness, and only differ by
whether (some) types are explicitly written in terms. We use the name iMLF and eMLF when this point of view
matters. For instance, only eMLF makes sense as a programming language. Otherwise, MLF refers to either
view, indifferently.
The full picture. Of course, something must have been lost while going from Full MLF to Shallow MLF. That
is, it may be the case in Shallow MLF that a local binding let x = a1 in a2 is typable while its operationally
equivalent form (λ(x) a2 ) a1 is not. Technically, Shallow MLF polymorphism is second-order, yet not first-class.
To see the practical consequences of this limitation, we shall proceed by comparison with ML. We use
unannotated terms by default, so as to ease the comparison between the different languages. Consider the
following expression in ML:
let f = λ(x) x in (f 42, f ”foo”)
The polymorphic type ∀(α) α → α, say σid , is inferred for the identity function and bound to the identifier f,
which may then be used at different type instances, namely int → int and string → string. One may consider
replacing the let-binding by an abstraction followed by an immediate application:
(λ (f ) (f 42, f ”foo”)) (λ(x) x)
This expression is not typable in ML, as it would require the function parameter f to be assigned a polymorphic
type. In contrast, this expression is typable in iMLF, which features second-order polymorphism. (In eMLF,
one need only add an explicit type-annotation, e.g. σid , on the parameter f .) However, this is only a simplistic
example. For instance, consider a small variant of the previous expression:
let f = choose id in (f succ, choose f ω)
The identifier succ stands for the successor function of type int → int. The identifier choose stands for a function
that takes two arguments and returns either one, which could be defined as λ (x) λ (y) if true then x else y,
of (principal) polymorphic type ∀(α) α → α → α. The identifier ω corresponds to the unannotated version of
ω † , that is, λ(x) x x. The expression above is not typable in System F. A formal proof of this fact is beyond the
scope of this paper—see (Pierce, 2002, Chapter 23) for hints on how to conduct such proofs. Interestingly, this
expression is typable in eMLF, taking the annotated version ω † instead of ω. Indeed, the expression choose id
can be typed with ∀(α ≥ σid ) α → α, which intuitively stands for all types σ → σ where σ is any instance of
σid . The parameter f can then be used with two peculiar instances, namely (int → int) → (int → int) and
σid → σid , which are incompatible in System F.
Unfortunately, replacing the local-binding by an abstraction followed by an immediate application leads to
the program
(λ (f ) (f succ, choose f ω)) (choose id)
which is not typable in iMLF. The problem is that the required flexible type ∀(α ≥ σid ) α → α that could
previously be assigned to the let-bound variable f, cannot be assigned to a λ-bound variable, as only System Ftypes are allowed for λ-bound variables in Shallow MLF.
This restriction is relaxed in Full MLF, which allows flexible quantification at arbitrary positions in types.
Hence, the previous example is typable in Full MLF. (In Full eMLF, it suffices to add the type annotation
∀(α ≥ σid ) α → α to the parameter f .)
The main outcomes of staying within Shallow MLF are a more comprehensive presentation of the language
and the connections drawn with existing systems, using the semantics of types as a tool not only to convey
strong intuitions but also to recover the syntactic instance relation as set containment on semantic types.
The meta-theoretical study of Shallow MLF presented hereafter builds on this semantic support and is thus
significantly simpler than—and mostly independent from—the previous study of the full version (Le Botlan and
Rémy, 2003; Le Botlan, 2004).
The remaining gap between Shallow MLF and Full MLF is a small step for the user but another big step for a
theoretician: the typing rules are exactly the same in both languages except that we unlock the restriction that
is imposed on the occurrences of flexible quantification in the shallow version. Hopefully, the intuitions built
RR n° 6228

8

Rémy & Le Botlan

Figure 1: Expressiveness of variants of MLF.
Variant

let-∀

λ-∀

let-≥

λ-≥

Simple Types

−
√

−

−

−

−

−

ML
System F
Simple MLF
Shallow MLF
Full MLF

√

−
√

√

√

√

√

√

√

−
−
√
√

−
−

−
√

for the shallow version should carry over to the full version. Unfortunately, our semantics of types cannot be
easily extended to cope with the full version.
The different versions of MLF are summarized and put in close correspondence with existing languages in
Table 1 and Figure 2.
All languages are presented in order of increasing expressiveness in the table. The first group, on the top
of the table and also appearing on the left-hand side of the figure, is composed of three well-known languages
where polymorphism is based on the standard ∀-quantification. The second group, on bottom of the table and
also appearing on the right-hand side on the figure, is composed of three variants of MLF where polymorphism
is based on the peculiar ≥-bounded quantification.
The correspondence between these two groups is explicitly represented on the figure by the horizontal dotted
arrows and on the table by the equality of the two submatrices left in white background on the diagonal (and
the two constant submatrices in gray background). In this correspondence, the standard ∀-quantification in
the first-group becomes the ≥-bounded quantification in the second group. In each group, expressiveness is
successively gained by added quantification to the type of let-bound parameters and, then, to that of λ-bound
parameters.
As mentioned earlier, Simple MLF is exactly as expressive as System F. This is represented by the identity of
the two lines at the junction of the two groups in the table and the double-line arrow relating them in the Figure.
The reason for this coincidence is that Simple MLF is obtained by adding flexible quantification to System F,
yet without any construction to exploit it. In this respect, Simple MLF is to Shallow MLF what simply-typed
λ-calculus is to ML: simply-typed λ-calculus has universal type variables but no type-instantiation mechanism!
Restated in the other direction, Shallow MLF is to Simple MLF what ML is to simply typed λ-calculus, as both
enable the underlying polymorphism on local-bindings in the very same manner. Pursuing the analogy, Full MLF
is to Shallow MLF what System F is to ML—it enables flexible polymorphism on function parameters and, more
generally, to appear at arbitrary position in types: quantification is first-class—but of different power—in both
Full MLF and System F. By contrast, it can only be used at local bindings in both Shallow MLF and ML.
The Systems F∧ (right-hand side of Figure 2) is an extension of System F with intersection types (Pierce,
1991), while Flet below is the restriction of F∧ to rank-1 intersection types (see §3.6). Equivalently, Flet is the
closure of Simple MLF by let-expansion. The arrows between Flet and F∧ and Simple MLF and Flet are materializing
these inclusions. The inclusion of Shallow MLF into Flet , which is proved below (§3.6), implies the correctness of
Shallow MLF. The inclusion between Full MLF and F∧ also holds but is not shown in this paper.
For completeness, two small remarks can also be made. First, Shallow MLF and Flet are two extensions of
Simple MLF with local-bindings that differ significantly in the way these are typed: In MLF, local-bindings can
be typed with Simple-MLF types and generalized afterward, while in Flet , they must either use intersection types
or be typed after performing let-reduction. Second, the difference between let-∀ extension and let-∧ vanishes
when replacing Simple MLF with Simple Types; that is, ML is both the let-∀ extension and let-∧ extension of
Simple Types.
We believe that a programming language should be based on the full rather than the shallow version of MLF.
However, other extensions such as higher-order types may be easier to explore in the simple version. Hence, the
shallow version is not only a pedagogical restriction, but also an interesting and solid point in the design space,
from which further investigations may be started.

INRIA

Recasting MLF

9

Figure 2: The small hierarchy of MLF variants.
F∧

+ λ-∀
ML
+ let-∀

+λ-∧

Full MLF

F

+ ∀≥

+ λ-∀≥

Flet

Shallow MLF
+ let-∀≥

Simple Types

Simple MLF

Standard ∀(α)

Flexible ∀(α ≥ σ)

+let-∧

Type inference is not addressed here, as it is a technically orthogonal issue and is not significantly easier
for Shallow MLF than for Full MLF. The reader is referred to (Le Botlan and Rémy, 2003; Le Botlan, 2004) or
independent study in subsequent work (Rémy and Yakobowski, 2007). As MLF was designed with first-order
type inference and let-polymorphism in mind, polymorphism need never be guessed: it is only picked at local
bindings or user-provided type annotations, and it is propagated to use sites by first-order unification. The
difficulty, and in fact the whole design of MLF, lies in the specification of its type system, and in particular, how
every use of polymorphism that would imply guessing has been ruled out. So, although we do not develop type
inference here, all the key ingredients can already be found in the Church-style version eMLF.
Outline of the paper. While previous studies focused on Full eMLF, this work is limited to the study of
Shallow MLF (Simple MLF is only introduced as a tool).
The paper is organized as follows. A gentle introduction to MLF exposing successively its Curry’s and
Church’s views, can be found in §2. The Curry’s view is explored in details, including discussions of type
soundness and of expressiveness in §3. The Church’s view is studied formally in §4: although the Church’s view
has been designed especially for type inference, we focus on its fundamental properties here and leave out type
inference for reasons explained above. We also address expressiveness of the Church’s view by showing that it
subsumes both ML and System F. Related works are discussed in §5 before concluding remarks. For clarity of
exposition, all proofs have been moved to appendices.
Figure 3 summarizes the seven encodings presented in §3 and §4. Encoding are represented by edges and
labeled with the corresponding theorem. (The interest of the direct encoding of System F to eMLF is to introduce
fewer annotations than the composition of encodings via iMLF, and in particular, fewer type annotations than
present in the original term.) The encoding from eMLF to ML is partial, defined on the subset of eMLF programs
that do not contain any annotations.
Notations. We write A # B to mean that the two sets A and B are disjoint. We write ē for a sequence of
elements e1 , . . . en . We use standard notions of variables, terms, binders, and free variables. The simultaneous
capture-avoiding substitution of a sequence of variables ū by a sequence of objects ē′ in an object e is written
e[ē′ /ū].
We use numerical labels in bold face such as (3) as a binding annotation in text or formulas and normal
font as (3) to refer to the corresponding binding occurrence. The scope of such labels is the current proof,
paragraph, or inner section, and is left implicit.

RR n° 6228

10

Rémy & Le Botlan

Figure 3: Encodings
Th 1

iMLF

F

Th 4

Th 2

Th 3

Flet

Th 5
eMLF
ML

Th 8
Th 9

2

An intuitive introduction to MLF

This section is primarily an informal introduction to MLF. The only prerequisite is a good knowledge of ML and
some knowledge of System F. We first remind Curry-style System F. However, we use a generic presentation G
so as to emphasize the strong relations between all type systems described here. In particular, we present both
Curry-style and Church-style versions of MLF as instances of G. We provide intuitions on the flexible and rigid
quantification that are at the heart of MLF, by means of examples. We also discuss—still informally—some of
the advantages of MLF compared to System F, besides type inference. This section may also be read back after
some technical knowledge of MLF has been acquired to deepen one’s understanding.

2.1

A generic Curry-style second-order type system

Expressions are the pure λ-terms with optional local definitions. Their BNF grammar is:
a ::= x | λ(x) a | a1 a2
| let x = a1 in a2

Terms
Local bindings (optional)

That is, terms are variables x, functions λ(x) a where the parameter x is bound in a, applications a1 a2 , and
optionally, local definitions let x = a in a′ where the variable x is bound (to a) in a′ . Terms are always taken up
to α-equivalence, that is, up to (capture avoiding) renaming of bound variables. Local definitions let x = a in a′
can always be seen as a way of marking immediate applications (λ(x) a′ ) a. The intention is to type them in a
special way, much as in ML, which is often easier and more general than typing the function and the application
independently. In some cases, we may however exclude local definitions in order to either simplify the language,
when local definitions do not actually increase expressiveness, or intentionally restrict the language. In either
case, we may still use local bindings in examples but only see them as syntactic sugar for immediate applications.
Types
Throughout this paper, we use several related but different notions of second-order types. For simplicity, we
use the same countable set of type variables ϑ for all notions of types and letters α, β, or γ to range over type
variables.
The generic presentation, summarized in the following BNF grammar, abstracts over the exact sets of
first-class types T and type schemes S, which are only partially specified.
τ ∈ T ::= α | τ → τ | . . .
| ∀(q) τ
σ ∈ S ::= τ | ∀(q) σ | . . .

q ∈ Q ::= α :: k

Types
Polymorphic types (optionally)
Type schemes
Bindings

Types should at least contain type variables α and arrow types τ → τ , but may also contain other forms
represented by the ellipsis. Of course, types could also contain other type constructors such as products, sums,
etc., without any technical complication. For conciseness, we do not include these in the formal presentation.
Depending on the particular instance, types may also contain polymorphic types ∀(q) τ where q is a binding
of the form (α :: κ). For the sake of generality, quantified type variables are constrained by kinds k ∈ K where
INRIA

Recasting MLF

11

the set of kinds K is left unspecified for the moment. We write dom(q) to refer to α. Type schemes σ extend
types with outermost quantification, as in ML. Still, as in ML, types are first-class while type schemes will
appear only in typing environments and typing judgments.
In simple cases, such as ML or System F, K is a singleton {⋆}. We may then abbreviate α :: ⋆ as α. The level
of generality allows both for multi-kinded type expressions, e.g. taking for K a set of atomic kinds and for more
complex forms of quantification, such as subtyping. Note, that K may contain type schemes as subexpressions
(see, for instance, types of F<: described below). We write ftv(k) for the free type variables of types expressions
that appear in k. In ∀(α :: k) σ, the ∀ quantifier binds α in σ but not in k. Free type variables are defined as
usual:
ftv(α) = {α}

ftv(τ → τ ′ ) = ftv(τ ) ∪ ftv(τ ′ )

ftv(∀(α :: k) τ ) = ftv(k) ∪ (ftv(τ ) \ {α})

Indeed, this definition must be completed to cover the possible extra forms in the definition of T . The extra
cases are usually obvious. We always consider types up to α-conversion. The scope of ∀-quantification extends
to the right as far as possible and → is right associative. That is, ∀(q) τ → τ → τ means ∀(q) (τ → (τ → τ )).
We may write ∀(qq ′ ) σ for ∀(q) ∀(q ′ ) σ.
For example, ML types and type schemes are defined as follows:
τ ∈ TML ::= α | τ → τ

σ ∈ SML ::= τ | ∀(q) σ
q ∈ QML ::= α :: ⋆

ML types
ML type schemes
ML bindings

This is indeed the simplest notion of generic types, as all options in the definition have been turned off.
Types of System F, which we call F-types, may also be described by an instance of the generic grammar:
t ∈ TF ::= α | t → t | ∀(q) t

σ ∈ SF ::= t
q ∈ QF ::= α :: ⋆

F types
F type schemes
F bindings

Quantifiers may appear in types directly and thus at arbitrary positions in F-types—as expected. In this case,
types are closed by outermost quantification and coincide with type schemes. We use letter t instead of letter
τ to range over F-types. This will be useful below in iMLF to distinguish F-types from other forms of τ -types.
Types of F<: are yet another example, that uses kinds in a more interesting way:
τ ∈ TF<: ::= α | τ → τ | ∀(q) τ | ⊤

σ ∈ SF<: ::= τ
q ∈ QF<: ::= α <: τ

F<: types
F<: type schemes
F<: bindings

Types and type schemes still coincide, but contain an extra element ⊤ and kinds are now types. Bindings are
written α <: τ rather than α :: τ .
Prefixes
As type variables come with bounds, most operations on types will be defined under a type environment, called
a prefix, that assigns bounds to their free type variables. A prefix Q is a sequence of bindings q1 ..qn . Its domain,
written dom(Q) is the set {α1 , .., αn }. We write ∅ for the empty prefix. A prefix Q binds all type variables of
dom(Q) (defined as the union of the pointwise domains). However, they may themselves have free type variables
written ftv(Q) that are defined recursively as ftv(∅) = ∅ and ftv(Q, q) = ftv(Q) ∪ (ftv(q) \ dom(Q)). Hence, for
a closed prefix q1 ..qn , dom(qi ) may only intersect ftv(qj ) for j > i. A prefix q1 ..qn is often used to build types
of the form ∀(q1 ) ..∀(qn ) τ , which we simply write ∀(q1 ..qn ) τ . Prefixes may also be used as type environments
in judgments under prefix, e.g. as type instance defined next.
We assume that the following well-formedness condition holds: for each prefix Q of the form qii∈1..n and for
each i and j in 1..n,
• i 6= j implies dom(qi ) 6= dom(qj ), and
• i ≥ j implies dom(qi ) ∈
/ ftv(qj ).

RR n° 6228

12

Rémy & Le Botlan

Type instance
The type-instance relation is meant to capture the idea that some types are better than others, in the sense
that some types can be automatically deduced from those of which they are instances. This may be specified
directly using a specific typing rule. For example, an expression of System F that has a polymorphic type ∀(α) σ
may be applied to any type τ resulting in an expression of type σ[τ /α]. That instantiation may also be left
implicit, i.e. without markers such as type abstraction and type application in expressions, as in Curry-style
type systems.
The instance relation for Curry-style System F, written ≤F , is the binary relation composed of exactly all
pairs of the form ∀(ᾱ) σ ≤F ∀(β̄) σ[τ̄ /ᾱ]) such that none of the variables β̄ is free in ∀(ᾱ) σ. The quantification
∀(β̄) is used to generalize some of the type variables that might have been introduced in τ̄ .
The definition of type instance relation ≤ML for ML is exactly the same except that it applies to weaker sets
of types and type schemes. Interestingly, the relation ≤ML is also the restriction of ≤F to ML type schemes.
We may abstract over the precise definition of the instance relation ⩽. For the sake of generality, we assume
that the instance relation is taken under some prefix Q. That is, ⩽ is a ternary relation (Q) σ ⩽ σ ′ between
a prefix Q and two type schemes σ and σ ′ . We say that ⩽ is a relation under prefix or also that ⩽ is a
prefixed relation. We use letter R to range over such relations. We may view (ternary) prefixed relations as
binary relations by treating the relation as a family of relations RQ indexed by prefixes Q ranging in the set
of all prefixes. That is R is reflexive (respectively symmetric, transitive, etc.) if relations RQ are reflexive
(respectively symmetric, transitive, etc.) for all prefixes Q. The inverse of a prefixed relation R is the relation
R−1 defined by taking the inverse of (RQ ) for (R−1 )Q . (We often write ≻ for (≺)−1 when R is a symbol ≺.)
The System-F type-instance relation ≤F happens to be a particular case where the relation is actually
independent of the prefix (hence, treated as a binary relation on types).
Another type instance relation that generalizes ≤F in an interesting way is type-containment ≤η , introduced
by Mitchell in the late 80’s (Mitchell, 1988). As for ≤F , type containment is independent of prefixes and can
thus also be treated as a binary relation. It is congruent but propagates contravariantly on the left-hand side of
arrow types (and covariantly everywhere else) and distributes ∀-quantifiers over arrows (see (Mitchell, 1988)).
Type containment allows to capture deep instantiations, e.g. σid → σid ≤η σid → (σid → σid ), as well as extrusion
of quantifiers, e.g. ∀(α′ ) α′ → (∀(α) α → α) ≤η ∀(α′ , α) α′ → α → α.
A truly ternary type-instance relation is the subtyping relation <: used in F<: . The prefix is used to
assign upper bounds to free type variables of the types being compared. As for type containment, this relation
propagates contra-variantly on the left-hand side of arrows.
Both ≤η and <: treat the arrow type asymmetrically, covariantly on the right-hand side and contra-variantly
on the left-hand side. When generalizing the language of types to arbitrary types constructors, they would
require type constructors to be declared with a signature defining their variance in each of their argument. By
contrast, the type-instance relations of ML or System F are symmetric and need not know about variance of
type-constructors.
Type equivalence
We assume that any suitable instance relation ⩽ is a preorder. Then, an instance relation induces an equivalence
under prefix, defined as the kernel of ⩽, i.e. ⩽ ∩ ⩾.
In the only case of F-types where the equivalence does not depend on prefixes, we actually consider types
up to equivalence, i.e. up to commutation of adjacent binders and removal of redundant binders (in addition
to α-conversion). That is, ∀(αα′ ) α → α′ , ∀(αα′ ) α′ → α, and ∀(αα′ α′′ ) α′ → α are thus considered as equal in
System F.
The generic Curry-style second-order type system
The generic Curry-style second-order type system, written G(T , S, Q, ⩽), is parametrized by a set of types T ,
type schemes S, bindings Q, and an instance relation ⩽ over type schemes.
Typing contexts are partial mappings with finite domains from program variables to type schemes. The free
type-variables of a typing context are the union of the free type variables of its codomain. We write ∅ the empty
mapping and Γ, x : t the mapping that sends x to t and behaves as Γ everywhere else.
Typing judgments are of the form (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ where Γ is a typing context and Q a closed prefix that
binds all type variables that appear free in σ or Γ. Hence, we must have ftv(σ) ∪ ftv(Γ) ⊆ dom(Q) (and ftv(Q)
empty).
Typing rules are given in Figure 4. Rules for variables, abstractions, and applications are standard, modulo
INRIA

Recasting MLF

13

Figure 4: Typing rules for G(T , S, Q, ⩽).
Var

Fun

App

x:σ∈Γ
(Q) Γ ⊢ x : σ

(Q) Γ, x : τ ⊢ a : τ ′
(Q) Γ ⊢ λ(x) a : τ → τ ′

(Q) Γ ⊢ a1 : τ2 → τ1
(Q) Γ ⊢ a2 : τ2
(Q) Γ ⊢ a1 a2 : τ1

Inst

Gen

(Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ
(Q) σ ⩽ σ ′
(Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ ′

(Q, q) Γ ⊢ a : σ
dom(q) ∈
/ ftv(Γ)
(Q) Γ ⊢ a : ∀(q) σ

Let

(Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ
(Q) Γ, x : σ ⊢ a′ : σ ′
(Q) Γ ⊢ let x = a in a′ : σ ′

the explicit mention of the prefix. As terms are unannotated, instantiation and generalization are left implicit,
as in ML. Hence, rules Inst and Gen are not syntax-directed: in each case, the expression a appears identically
in the premise and the conclusion. Rule Gen is standard and introduces polymorphism by discharging type
abstraction from the judgment hypothesis into the type of the expression. Rule Inst is a type-containment rule
that generalizes the more traditional forall-elimination step. This approach is preferable in a Curry-style type
system as it moves instantiation from the typing derivation into a type-instance sub-derivation.
Rule Let is used for typechecking local definitions in a special way. This rule is indeed inspired from ML
and reproduces the very same mechanism for typing local-derivations within System G. In particular, the bound
expression is assigned a type scheme rather than a type. This improves over the default rule that would consist
in typechecking let x = a1 in a2 as the immediate application (λ(x) a2 ) a1 . In cases where types and type
schemes coincide, e.g. as in System F, we could simply view local definition as syntactic sugar for immediate
applications. In other cases, Let is actually the key rule that truly empowers System G.
If G1 is an instance of System G, we write G1 :: J to mean without ambiguity that judgment J refers to the
system G1 . However, we usually leave the underlying type system implicit from context.
Renamings. A renaming is a finite bijective mapping from type variables to type variables. As usual, dom(φ)
is {α | φ(α) 6= α}. Note that if φ is a renaming, then dom(φ) and codom(φ) are equal and φ is a permutation
of its domain. We extend renamings to bindings, taking (φ(α) ≥ φ(σ)) for φ(α ≥ σ) and to prefixes, taking
(φ(qi )) i∈I for φ(qi i∈I ).
Notice that if dom(φ) is disjoint from dom(Q), then dom(φ(Q)) is equal to dom(Q) but φ(Q) is not, in
general, equal to Q.
Hypotheses. In order for the type system to have interesting properties, the instance relation ⩽ is assumed
to satisfy some conditions.
Let extension over well-formed prefixes be the smallest order ⊇ that contains all pairs QqQ′ ⊇ QQ′ for any
prefixes Q and Q′ . We say that a prefix Q2 extends a prefix Q1 whenever Q2 ⊇ Q1 holds. Intuitively, Q2 just
contains more bindings than Q1 .
In the rest of the paper, we only consider instance relations that satisfy the following two axioms:
Renaming

Extra-Bindings

(Q) σ1 ⩽ σ2
φ renaming
(φ(Q)) φ(σ1 ) ⩽ φ(σ2 )

Q ⊇ Q′
(Q′ ) σ1 ⩽ σ2
(Q) σ1 ⩽ σ2

Then, we can prove that typing judgments can be renamed and prefixes can be extended:
Lemma 2.1.1
i) Renaming of typing derivations: If (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ holds and φ is a renaming, then (φ(Q)) φ(Γ) ⊢ a :
φ(σ) holds.
ii) Prefix extension: If (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ holds and Q′ ⊇ Q, then (Q′ ) Γ ⊢ a : σ holds.
Both proofs are by induction on the derivation and indeed rely on both axioms.

RR n° 6228

14

Rémy & Le Botlan

Particular instances of System G.
Curry-style System F and ML are two by-design immediate instances of System G, namely G(TF , TF , QF , ≤F ) and
G(TML , SML , QML , ≤ML ). Notice that we slightly depart from the tradition to view ML as a subcase of System F
and instead view both as special cases of System G.
An interesting extension of System F, introduced by Mitchell and called Fη is the closure of System F by
η-contraction (Mitchell, 1988). It may be concisely described as G(TF , TF , QF , ≤η ). As noticed by Mitchell, Fη
allows more terms to have principal types. For instance, σid , which is an abbreviation for ∀(α) α → α, is a
principal type for the identity function. Other correct types σid → σid or σid → σid → σid are ≤η -instance of σid .
In fact, this is also the case for any possible type of the identity. Hence, σid captures all types of the identity up
to ≤η -instantiation. For that reason Mitchell has suggested that Fη could be a better candidate than System F
for type inference. Still, many expressions do not have principal types in Fη . Somehow, Fη is simultaneously
too expressive (we do not really need contra-variance of type instance) and too weak for our needs (it lacks
simultaneous instantiation constraints).
The language F<: proposed by Cardelli (Cardelli, 1993) can also be defined as the generic type system
G(TF<: , SF<: , QF<: , <:). Note however, that this is a Curry-style presentation while F<: is usually presented in
Church style.

2.2

i MLF: Curry-style MLF.

Returning to our goal, we seek for a language eMLF with partial type annotations that is at least as expressive
as System F (each term of Curry-style System F is the type erasure of some term of eMLF), supersedes ML (all
terms of ML are in eMLF, without any annotation), and for which we can perform type inference using a form of
first-order unification. Based and improving on previous experiences, we wish to manipulate second-order types
transparently, so as to bypass inelegant and verbose boxing and unboxing operations and avoid annotations
for all ML programs. Indeed, we seek for the fusion of ML-style implicit polymorphism with explicit F-style
polymorphism, rather than just their juxtaposition, so that the best of each approach also strengthens the other
one.
The inadequacy of F-types
Our goal implies that type instantiation must be left implicit, as in ML. Implicit instantiation is easy and rather
natural in ML. The main reason is that polymorphism is not first-class. That is, only type schemes can be
polymorphic. Types which may appear on the left of arrows cannot be polymorphic. Therefore, polymorphic
values must always be instantiated before being passed as arguments to functions. This is no more true
in System F—or any other language with first-class polymorphism, where a polymorphic value may also be
passed as argument. Moreover, implicit polymorphism, as in Curry’s style, brings an additional difficulty: the
application of a polymorphic function to a polymorphic value may become ambiguous, as a result of permitting
any polymorphic expression e of type τ to be considered as an expression of any type τ ′ that is an instance of
τ.
For example, consider a value v of type τ and a function choose of type ∀(α) α → α → α (choose could either
be a polymorphic comparison returning the greatest of two arguments or just a function randomly returning
one of two arguments). What should be the type of choose v in System F? Should v be kept as polymorphic
as τ or instantiated to some type τ ′ —but which one? Indeed, any type τ ′ → τ ′ is a correct one for choose v
as long as τ ′ is an instance of τ . In other words, the correct types for choose v form a set {τ ′ → τ ′ | τ ≤ τ ′ }6 .
Unfortunately, this set does not have a greatest lower bound that could be used as a principal type to represent
all others.
This very simple example raises a crucial issue whose solution is really the key to understanding MLF from
both the intuitive and formal perspectives.
V
One may be tempted to use infinite intersection types {τ ′ → τ ′ | τ ≤ τ ′ }, as suggested by Leivant in
another context (Leivant, 1990). However, this is pernicious from a logical point of view. Moreover, this would
ignore the underlying structure of such sets, which are always instantiation upward closed.
6 We use “≤” rather than ≤

F here, as we are about to extend the set of types and enlarge the type-instance relation accordingly.

INRIA

Recasting MLF

15

Flexible quantification—the Key
Since intersection types are too powerful for our purposes, we introduce a new form of type scheme ∀(α ≥ σ)
α → α to describe the set of all types τ → τ such that τ is an instance of σ. We may indeed interpret such type
schemes as sets of System-F types (§3.1). The instance relation ≤ between type schemes is then defined as set
inclusion on their interpretations. This makes ∀(α ≥ σ ′ ) α → α an instance of ∀(α ≥ σ) α → α whenever σ ′ is
an instance of σ and thus really makes ∀(α ≥ σ) α → α a principal type for the expression choose v where v
has principal type scheme σ. Type schemes contain types, but all type schemes are not types. Types may still
be polymorphic. For instance, σid shall remain a type in iMLF.
The binding (α ≥ σ) is called a flexible binding, as the bound σ may be soundly replaced by a type scheme
σ ′ or a type τ that are instances of σ, producing an instance of the whole type. The occurrence of σ in (α ≥ σ)
is also called a flexible occurrence.
By contrast, we call rigid occurrences of a type below an arrow, as those of σid in σid → σid . Rigid occurrences
may not be instantiated, as this could be unsound. For example, the function λ(x) x x has type σid → σid ,
where σid is ∀(α) α → α, but does not have type τ ′ → τ nor even type τ ′ → τ ′ for arbitrary instances τ ′ of σid .
In particular, it does not have type ∀(α) (α → α) → (α → α). Although it would always be safe to instantiate
types on the right-hand side of arrow types (or more generally on positive occurrences in types), we do not do
so. We may always use a type scheme ∀(α ≥ τ ) τ ′ → α instead of τ ′ → τ to explicitly allow instances of τ to be
taken for α.
For the sake of uniformity, we introduce a special trivial bound ⊥ (read bottom) to mean any type. We may
then see ∀(α) α → α as syntactic sugar for ∀(α ≥ ⊥) α → α. Intuitively, ⊥ could itself be seen as representing
the set of all types and, indeed, ⊥ is equivalent to ∀(α ≥ ⊥) α in our setting. In this view, ∀(α ≥ σid ) α → α is
an instance of ∀(α) α → α: since the bound σid of the former is an instance of the bound ⊥ of the latter, the
interpretation of the former contains the interpretation of the latter.
One may wonder what is the meaning of a type such as (∀(α ≥ τ ) α → α) → τ ′ when a flexible type appears
under an arrow type. We just forbid such types. This is achieved by restricting the use of flexible quantification
to type schemes and only allow quantification with trivial bounds in types. More precisely, types and type
schemes for iMLF (Curry-style MLF) are defined as follows:
τ ∈ Ti ::= α | τ → τ | ∀(α ≥ ⊥) τ

σ ∈ Si ::= τ | ∀(q) σ | ⊥

q ∈ Qi ::= α ≥ σ

iMLF types
iMLF types schemes
iMLF bindings

Type schemes that are not types are called proper type schemes; they may not appear under arrows. A
consequence of this stratification is that proper type schemes cannot be assigned to parameters of function.
Therefore, local definitions let x = a1 in a2 play a key role, exactly as in ML. Indeed, one may first assign a type
scheme σ to a1 and use σ as the type for the parameter x while typechecking a2 . By contrast, this assignment
of type σ to variable x would be forbidden in the immediate application (λ(x) a2 ) a1 whenever σ is a proper
type scheme, as x would be λ-bound and its type would have to appear under the arrow type of the function
(see Rule Fun).
We thus consider the instance G(Ti , Si , Qi , ≤) of Generic Curry-style System F with flexible quantification
and local definitions. This intermediate language is in Curry style and all type information is still left implicit.
For this reason, we also call it iMLF (read implicit MLF). Remarkably, the power of iMLF only lies in its type,
type scheme, and type-instance definitions and not in its typing rules, as it is just an instance of System G.

2.3

eMLF: Church-style MLF.

The language iMLF is our stepping stone to eMLF. By comparison with System F, more expressions have
principal types and many expressions have more general types. However, iMLF does not allow for type inference
yet, even though it was designed with type inference in mind, as all type information is still left implicit. We
now devise eMLF—a Church-style version of iMLF that enables type inference7 .
7 Arguably, eMLF could be considered half way between Curry style and Church style since some type reconstruction based on
first-order unification is still needed for parameters of functions that are left unannotated.

RR n° 6228

16

Rémy & Le Botlan

First-order type inference with second-order types
Our goal is to perform type inference based on first-order unification but in a language with second-order types.
In addition, we wish to reach all ML programs without type annotations and all System F programs via suitable
type annotations.
This has immediate consequences in terms of examples that we should or should not type. For example, we
should infer a type for the identity function id, or the expression let x = id in x x, as both are already typable in
ML. Conversely, we should not type the self-application ω, defined as λ(x) x x (1), unless we explicitly annotate
the parameter as in the expression λ(x : σid ) x x (which we write ω † ).
Our goal is to design the system so that the second-order polymorphism is never guessed. But what
does guessing exactly mean? How can we combine ML style implicit polymorphism with second-order explicit
polymorphism? The difficulty may be seen by comparing the expressions a1 defined as (λ(z) z) ω † and a2
defined as (λ(x) x x) id. Should we reject both, as their function parameters carry values of polymorphic
types—σid → σid for z in a1 and σid for x in a2 ? Indeed, a1 may be typed as (λ(z : σid → σid ) z) ω † . Here, it
seems that σid → σid must be guessed as the type of the parameter z. However, one may also type λ(z) z in a1
as α → α, generalize the resulting type to ∀(α) α → α, and finally instantiate it to (σid → σid ) → (σid → σid ),
which may be more concisely summarized by its fully annotated form (Λα. λ(z : α) z) [σid → σid ] ω † in Churchstyle System F. In this expression, σid → σid need not be guessed as the type of the parameter z, but as the
type for specializing the universal variable α to obtain the polymorphic type (σid → σid ) → (σid → σid ) of
λ(z) z. Fortunately, we may—and must, as argued in §2.2—devise MLF to fully infer type abstractions and type
applications (and never guess polymorphic types for function parameters). Thus we accept a1 (2). Conversely,
we reject a2 for the very same reason we rejected ω (1). Indeed, any closed subterm of a well-typed term must
also be well-typed. Thus a2 , which contains the ill-typed closed subterm ω will also be ill-typed.
Of course, we distinguish a function parameter whose type is inferred from one whose type is given. We
do so much as in ML, by distinguishing between types τ (also called monotypes), which do not contain any
quantifier and can be inferred, and proper type schemes σ, also called polytypes for emphasis. The parameters
z and x of a1 and a2 may only be assigned monotypes. This justifies the rejection of a2 , as λ(x) x x may not be
typed when x is a monotype. Conversely, a1 may be typed by assigning z a monotype, as explained above (2).
By contrast with a2 , the parameter x of λ(x : σid ) x x may be assigned the polytype σid , since it is explicitly
annotated.
Unfortunately, this distinction is not sufficiently permissive. Consider the expression a3 defined as λ(z)
(z ω † ), which somehow lies between a1 and a2 . The parameter z of a3 must have a polymorphic type while
typechecking the body of the function, exactly as in the expression a2 . However, this polymorphism is not used
in the body of a3 but only carried through. Wishfully, it should thus also be accepted. As another hint, remark
that a3 is the β-reduction of (λ(y) λ(z) z y) ω † , which we refer to as a4 . Arguing as for a1 , it is clear that a4
must be typable. As the β-expanded form is typable, we may expect the β-reduced form to also be—subject
reduction will hold when the redexes are let-bindings or applications of unannotated λ-abstractions. As a crosschecking final example, should the expression a5 defined as λ(z) ω † z be accepted? We may reason by analogy
with the previous example and either check that z is not used polymorphically in the body of the function or
check that its β-expansion (λ(x) λ(y) x y) ω † is typable.
It is actually a remarkable and essential property of MLF that whenever a1 a2 is typable, then apply a1 a2
also is, with the same type, where indeed apply stands for the expression λ(x) λ(y) x y—with no type annotation
on its parameters. As a remarkable and important corollary, if a function a is typable with some type σ, then so
is its η-expanded form λ(z) a z. In practice, such properties ensure that well-typed programs are stable under
some minor but useful program transformations. More type-preserving program transformations are given in
§4.5.
Abstracting second-order polymorphism into first-order types
To solve this last series of examples, our solution is very much inspired by boxed polymorphism, which allows
second-order polymorphism to hang under monotypes (Garrigue and Rémy, 1999). We retain the very same idea
of boxing polymorphism, but make boxes virtual, by abstracting (instead of boxing) second-order polymorphism
as a first-order type variable. For instance, abstracting σid as α allows the polymorphic type σid → σid to be
represented by the monotype α → α.
Technically, we keep abstractions in the prefix Q that appears in front of typing judgments (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ,
using a new form of bindings (α ⇒ σ), which should be read “α abstracts σ.” Resuming with the typechecking
of a5 , we may write (α ⇒ σid ) z : α ⊢ ω † z : α (3). The hypothesis that α abstracts σid allows to abstract the
INRIA

Recasting MLF

17

type σid → σid of ω † as α → α. We may then assign the type α → α to ω † and type α to the application of
ω † z when z is assumed to be of type α. Note that abstraction is an asymmetric relation and it is not the case
that σid abstracts α. In particular, (α ⇒ σ) z : α ⊢ z : σid does not hold. This would reveal hidden information
and it is not allowed implicitly, but only explicitly via a type annotation. Discharging the assumption on z in
the judgment (3) (like in Rule Fun), leads to (α ⇒ σid ) ⊢ a5 : α → α. Finally discharging the prefix (like in
Rule Gen), we may conclude ⊢ a5 : ∀(α ⇒ σid ) α → α. This can be read as “a5 has type α → α where α is
σid .” Notice both the analogy and the difference with flexible bounds. Here, the bound of α means exactly σid
and cannot be instantiated. We call (α ⇒ σid ) a rigid binding and the position of σid in this type scheme a rigid
occurrence.
Although σid is the only possible meaning for α, it cannot be substituted inside α → α. That is, σ1 defined
as ∀(α ⇒ σid ) α → α is not equivalent to σid → σid , nor to ∀(α ⇒ σid , α′ ⇒ σid ) α → α′ , which we refer
to as σ2 . Maybe surprisingly, σ1 is more abstract than σ2 , which we write σ2 ⊏
− σ1 . To see this, one may
read the latter as ∀(α ⇒ σid ) (∀(α′ ⇒ σid ) α → α′ ) and abstract σid as α in the binding (α′ ⇒ σid ), leading
to ∀(α ⇒ σid ) (∀(α′ ⇒ α) α → α′ ), which is equivalent to ∀(α ⇒ σid ) α → α. The later step holds because
monotype bounds, which have no other instances but themselves, are “transparent” and can always be inlined,
i.e. substituted for the variable that binds them.
Intuitively, polytype bounds may also be expanded. For instance, ∀(α ⇒ σid , α′ ⇒ σid ) α → α′ intuitively
stands for σid → σid . However, this is not technically correct as in general the position of quantifiers would be
ambiguous. For example σid → σid → σid could be read either as ∀(α ⇒ σid , α′ ⇒ σid , α′′ ⇒ σid ) α → α′ → α′′
or ∀(α ⇒ σid , α′ ⇒ σid → σid ) α → α′ where σid → σid need in turn to be expanded. However, both are not
considered equivalent in iMLF. Thus, we simply forbid polytypes to appear under arrow types, and instead force
them to be abstracted as variables in auxiliary bindings. Consistently, and by contrast with iMLF, we restrict
types to monotypes and force all polytypes to be type schemes.
Type annotations are used to reveal abstractions. For instance, λ(x) (x : σid ) x, is typed as follows:
the annotation (x : σid ) requires that x has some type α where α is an abstraction of σid ; the annotation
then reveals σid as the type of (the annotated) x instead of the (weaker) abstract type α. We thus have
(α ⇒ σid ) x : α ⊢ (x : σid ) : σid , using a derived rule of the form
(α ⇒ σid ) x : α ⊢ x : α
(α ⇒ σid ) α ⊐
− σid
(α ⇒ σid ) x : α ⊢ (x : σid ) : σid
Once the type σid has been revealed, it may be instantiated, e.g. into α → α. Therefore, we have (α ⇒ σid )
x : α ⊢ (x : σid ) x : α and, finally, ⊢ λ(x) (x : σid ) x : ∀(α ⇒ σid ) α → α. There is still one subtlety when
typechecking the simpler program λ(x) (x : σid ). From the intermediate step (α ⇒ σid ) x : α ⊢ (x : σid ) : σid we
may not conclude (α ⇒ σid ) ⊢ (x : σid ) : α → σid as α → σid would be an ill-formed type scheme. Moreover,
this would just be one solution among many others, as σid could also have been instantiated. The solution is to
use a flexible binding (α′ ≥ σid ) to represent any type of x through the type variable α′ leading to the judgment
(α ⇒ σid , α′ ≥ σid ) ⊢ (x : σid ) : α′ . We may then discharge both the context and the prefix and conclude
that λ(x : σid ) x has type ∀(α ⇒ σid , α′ ≥ σid ) α → α′ . This captures all possible types—given the annotation.
Retrospectively, we may see the annotation (a : σid ) as the application ( : σid ) a, where the notation ( : σ)
stands for the expression λ(x) (x : σ) and may be provided as a (collection of) primitive(s) with type scheme(s)
∀(α ⇒ σ, α′ ≥ σ) α → α′ .

Fitting it together into eMLF
The type system eMLF we have devised so far does not fit directly into the Curry-style System G that does not
permit any annotations on source terms. As type abstractions and type instantiation remain implicit in eMLF,
the only new construction is, for the moment, a new form of abstraction λ(x : σ) a where the parameter x is
annotated with a type scheme σ. We shall see below how this construction can be explained in terms of a more
atomic simple term annotation.
In fact, we restrict the bounds of rigid bindings to a subset of type schemes, ranged over by letter ρ, that
correspond to System-F types as defined by the following grammar.
τ ∈ Te ::= α | τ → τ

σ ∈ Se ::= τ | ∀(q) σ | ⊥

eMLF type schemes
eMLF bindings

ρ ∈ Re ::= τ | ∀(α ≥ ⊥) ρ | ∀(α ⇒ ρ) ρ

F-like type schemes

q ∈ Qe ::= α ≥ σ | α ⇒ ρ

RR n° 6228

eMLF types

18

Rémy & Le Botlan

As a consequence, non-trivial flexible bounds may not appear under a rigid bound. This is only to keep eMLF
in exact correspondence with iMLF.
Of course, we must adapt the instance relation ≤ of iMLF to an instance relation ⊑ on eMLF type schemes.
In fact, ⊑ is recursively defined together with a subrelation ⊏
− that captures the notion of type abstraction
mentioned above, which is the essential difference between iMLF and eMLF. There is some degree of liberty in
the definition of these two relations, which is discussed at the end of this section, while the precise definition
can be found in §4.
From a typing point of view, we may hide type annotations into a collection of primitives ( : ρ) as suggested
above and see λ(x : ρ) a as syntactic sugar for λ(x) let x = (x : ρ) in a. This encoding will be explained in detail
below. In short, it works as follows. On the one hand, the annotation on ( : ρ) requests its argument x to have
type α where α abstracts the type scheme ρ. Thus, the λ-bound variable x has type α, which is a monotype as
requested. On the other hand, the annotation returns a value of (concrete) type σ as opposed to the abstract
type α—we may say that it reveals the concrete type σ of α. Hence, the let-bound variable x has type σ and
may be used within a with different instances. Of course, we may derive the following typing rule for annotated
abstractions:
⋆
Fun

(Q) Γ, x : ρ ⊢ a : τ
α∈
/ ftv(τ )
(Q) Γ ⊢ λ(x : ρ) a : ∀(α ⇒ ρ) α → τ
Following this approach, eMLF remains an instance of System G—at least from a typechecking viewpoint.
However, this solution requires ρ to appear at a rigid occurrence in the type ∀(α ⇒ ρ) ∀(α′ ≥ ρ) α → α′ ,
which prevents ρ to be an arbitrary type scheme σ. While this restriction is not a problem in practice, it is more
restrictive than necessary and does not allow to directly map derivations of iMLF programs to eMLF programs.
Therefore, we give a direct account of type annotations, moving slightly out of System G, and introduce the
following typing rule:
Annot

(Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ ′
(Q) σ ′ ⊐
−σ
(Q) Γ ⊢ (a : σ) : σ
This allows all type schemes to be explicitly coerced along the inverse of type abstraction, called revelation.
There is still no surprise in the typing rules of eMLF: the power of eMLF lies in its types, the enforcement of a
clear separation between types schemes and types, and the decomposition of the instance relation of iMLF into
a smaller implicit instance relation and explicit revelation, which we explain below in more details.
Design space
The semantics of eMLF is given by translation into iMLF by both dropping type annotations and inlining rigid
bindings. For the sake of comparison between the instance relation ⊑ of eMLF and the instance relation ≤ of
iMLF, we may always see types of eMLF as types of iMLF by inlining all rigid bindings. While ≤ is uniquely
determined by the encoding of its types into sets of System-F types (given in §3.2), the relation ⊑ is only a
subrelation of ≤, so as to allow type inference in eMLF. Although type inference is out of the scope of this paper
and described elsewhere (Le Botlan and Rémy, 2003; Le Botlan, 2004; Rémy and Yakobowski, 2008a), we may
explain the choice of ⊑ as follows.
A design choice for eMLF is to treat polymorphism as first-class, as in iMLF, but never have to guess
it. Furthermore, typable expressions must have principal types, so that type inference is both tractable and
practical. Concretely, types of eMLF are enriched so as to distinguish between types ∀(α ⇒ σid ) α → α and
∀(α ⇒ σid , α′ ⇒ σid ) α → α′ , say σ1 and σ2 , that are confounded in iMLF. In other words, the equivalence
relation ⊏
−
−, the kernel of ≤, which is too coarse, is replaced by the asymmetric, more discriminative abstraction
⊐
relation ⊏
−, whose kernel ≡, is smaller than ⊏
−
− and such that (⊏
⊐
−∪⊐
−)∗ is ⊏
−
− (1), where ⊐
⊐
−, called revelation, is
the inverse of ⊏
−. This ensures that nothing is really lost: type abstraction is implicitly used to abstract (forget)
type information, i.e. to replace a concrete type scheme σ by a type variable α that abstracts σ; conversely, type
annotations are explicitly used to reveal (actually, recover) the concrete type scheme that a variable abstracts
over. Hence, we may also use revelation in eMLF via explicit type annotations.
Therefore, the design space mainly lies in the choice of the preorder ⊏
−, which is already constrained by (1),
so that eMLF and iMLF coincide up to type annotations. The abstraction must not be too coarse, as otherwise
eMLF would coincide with iMLF exactly, require type annotation and have undecidable type inference. The
abstraction must not be too discriminative either, as in order for eMLF to be a conservative extension of ML, ≡
should at least contain the restriction of ⊏
−
− to ML type schemes. For instance, if ≡ were the identity relation,
⊐
INRIA

Recasting MLF

19

then eMLF would distinguish types such as two representations ∀(α ⇒ τ ) α → α and ∀(α ⇒ τ, α′ ⇒ τ ) α → α′
of the same type τ → τ .
We may remove some degrees of freedom in the definition of ⊏
−, by requiring revelation to be confluent, i.e.
−;⊐
⊏
− (one step of ⊏
− followed by one step of ⊐
−) to be a subrelation of ⊐
−;⊏
−. This also implies that ⊏
−
− is in
⊐
fact equal to ⊐
−;⊏
− (2). When splitting ⊏
−
− into ⊐
⊐
−;⊏
−, there is in fact a natural orientation of the rules that
is induced by ≤. For example, consider the type schemes σ1′ , defined as ∀(α ≥ σid ) α → α, and σ2′ , defined as
∀(α ≥ σid , α′ ≥ σid ) α → α′ , obtained from the types σ1 and σ2 (defined two paragraphs above) by replacing
rigid bounds with flexible ones. Type σ1′ is an instance of σ2′ in iMLF. That is, flexible bindings can be shared
along the instance relation in iMLF. Therefore, we choose the same direction for rigid bindings and let σ2 ⊏
− σ1
hold in eMLF.
We thus seek for a confluent pre-order ⊐
−, such that ⊐
−;⊏
− is ⊏
−
− and ⊏
⊐
−∩⊐
−, i.e. ≡, contains at least the
equivalence of ML type schemes. In addition, we should minimize ⊐
−\⊏
− which determines when explicit type
annotations are required. That is, maximize ≡ within ⊏
−
− (so as preserve type soundness) while retaining both
⊐
the decidability of type inference and the existence of principal types (3).
Finally, once ⊏
− is determined, the relation ⊑ must be such that ⊑ ∩ ⊒ is ≡ and (⊑ ∪ ⊐
−)∗ is ≤. In addition,
⊑ should be chosen as large as possible, so as to minimize the number of type annotations.
Beyond this point, we may only provide hints, as a detailed discussion of type inference is out of the scope of
this paper. The preservation of principal types requires the commutation of ≡ with type inference rules (Rémy
and Yakobowski, 2008a) and imposes further constraints on ≡. While the original choice for ≡ (Le Botlan
and Rémy, 2003) does verify the criteria (3) above, it is not the largest such relation. The relation proposed
in this work is more general. It also verifies the criteria (3), as shown in recent works based on graphs by
Rémy and Yakobowski (2008a, 2007), although with a different presentation. Whether it is optimal—if we
exclude considering special cases—is a difficult question, although the graph presentation, which exposes the
commutation properties between type inference and type instance more clearly, might help find an answer.
In summary, there is actually little choice for the definition of ⊑, except changing the relation ≤ itself—or
considering arbitrary special cases. The design choice made in this paper is ultimately justified by type inference
for Full eMLF, shown in two other works with minor differences—a slightly weaker relation in the original work
or a slight difference in the definition of the relation in the more recent works based on graphs. Interestingly,
while Full MLF uses a richer set of types (where rigid bounds can be arbitrary σ-types rather and not only
ρ-types), the restriction of its type instance relation to MLF types is exactly the type instance relation of MLF.
Hence, the semantics of types of iMLF determines type instance ≤ in iMLF which in turn leaves little freedom
for ⊑ and ⊏
− in eMLF and also strongly constraints their generalization to Full eMLF.

3

i MLF, Curry-style MLF

In this section we study iMLF, that is G(Ti , Si , Qi , ≤) and, in particular, the type-instance relation ≤ introduced
in §2.2. For that purpose, we define an interpretation of iMLF types as sets of F types that induces a semantic
definition of type instance (§3.2). An alternative syntactic definition of type instance is given next (§3.3). We
also provide an encoding of iMLF terms into terms of Flet (§3.6 and §3.5), which reduces type safety of iMLF to
that of Flet . The expressiveness and modularity of iMLF are discussed in §3.7.

3.1

Types and prefixes

Flexible bindings are the main novelty of iMLF. So as to be self-contained, we remind their definition here:
τ ∈ Ti ::= α | τ → τ | ∀(α ≥ ⊥) τ

σ ∈ Si ::= τ | ∀(q) σ | ⊥
q ∈ Qi ::= α ≥ σ

Types
Type Schemes
Bindings

The arrow is a type constructor. For simplification, it is the only type constructor but there is no difficulty in
generalizing types with other type constructors. The types τ1 and τ2 in τ1 → τ2 are called type arguments.
Type schemes are used as bounds for variables, which limits the way those variables may be instantiated.
The special type scheme ⊥ (read bottom) is the most general bound, also called the trivial bound. A variable
with a trivial bound is said to be unconstrained. We define ∀(α) σ as syntactic sugar for ∀(α ≥ ⊥) σ. We recall
that free (type) variables are defined in § 2.1 (page 11).
RR n° 6228

20

Rémy & Le Botlan

Inert types. In iMLF, a type is inert if and only if it is a type variable or an arrow type (that is, of the form
τ1 → τ2 for some types τ1 and τ2 ). The set of inert types is written Ii . Intuitively, inert types have no other
instance but themselves (up to equivalence), i.e., if τ is in Ii and τ is an instance of τ ′ then τ ′ is an instance of
τ —and so equivalent to τ .
Polytypes. The set Ti of iMLF types contains only types with trivial bounds ⊥. Notice that ⊥ is not a type
but a type scheme. However, ∀(α) α, which as we shall see shortly is equivalent to ⊥, is a type.
Types of Ti can be mapped to TF in a trivial way, just by exchanging the trivial bound with the unique kind
⋆. If τ is in Ti , we write ⌈τ ⌉ for the counter-part of τ in TF .
F-substitutions. We call F-substitutions and write θ for idempotent substitutions mapping type variables to
F-types.

3.2

Interpretation of types and prefixes

Intuitively, the type scheme ∀(α ≥ σ) σ ′ is meant to represent all types σ ′ where α is any instance of σ. We
formalize this intuition by giving a formal interpretation of types and type schemes as sets of F-types. If S is a
set of F-types, we write ∀(α) S for the set {∀(α) t | t ∈ S} and θ(S) for {θ(t) | t ∈ S}.
Definition 3.2.1 (Semantics of types) The semantics of a type τ , written {{τ }} is the instance closure of its
translation to System F, i.e. {t ∈ TF | ⌈τ ⌉ ≤F t}. The semantics of type schemes, written {{σ}}, is recursively
defined by t ∈ {{σ}} if and only if σ is ⊥ or of the form ∀(α ≥ σ ′ ) σ ′′ and t is of the form ∀(β̄) t′′ [t′ /α] with
β̄ # ftv(σ), t′ ∈ {{σ ′ }}, and t′′ ∈ {{σ ′′ }}.
Note that the semantics of ⊥ and ∀(α) α are both equal to TF , as suggested earlier, although the former is only
a type scheme and not a type. A type of the form ∀(α) τ can be seen both as a type and as a type scheme. In
the following lemma, we check that both views lead to the same interpretation.
Lemma 3.2.2 (Consistency) For any type τ , the semantics of τ seen as a type and the semantics of τ seen
as a type scheme are equal.
Example 3.1 The interpretation of the polymorphic type σid , defined as ∀(α) α → α, is the set composed of
all types of the form ∀(ᾱ) t → t. In turn, the interpretation of ∀(α ≥ σid ) α → α is the set composed of all types
of the form ∀(β̄) (∀(ᾱ) t → t) → (∀(ᾱ) t → t). Although both sides of the arrow may vary, they must do so in
sync and always remain equal. Note also that ∀(ᾱ) t → t is not necessarily closed, hence the quantification over
variables β̄ in front.
The instance relation of System F induces an instance relation in iMLF. However, as type instance is defined
under prefixes, we must first give a meaning to prefixes.
In a typing judgment, a prefix is meant to capture the possible types that may be substituted for the
variables in the domain of the prefix. Thus, the interpretation of a prefix is a set of substitutions. As usual,
the composition operator is written ◦. That is, f ◦ g is the function x 7→ f (g(x). Given a family of functions
(fi )i∈1..n , we write ◦i∈1..n fi for f1 ◦ . . . ◦ fn .
Definition 3.2.3 (Semantics of prefixes) The semantics of a prefix Q of the form (αi ≥ σi )i∈1..n , written
{{Q}} is the set of all F-substitutions of the form ◦i∈1..n (αi 7→ ti ) where ti ∈ {{σi }} for i in 1..n. As a particular
case, {{∅}} is the singleton composed of the identity function.
In fact, we may restrict to certain decompositions that are canonical.
Definition 3.2.4 A canonical decomposition of an F-substitution is a decomposition of the form ◦i∈1..n θi where
all θi ’s are F-substitutions (hence idempotent) and have disjoint domains.
Notice, that given the idempotence of individual substitutions and disjointness of their domains, the idempotence
of the composition is then equivalent to the property codom(θi ) # dom(θj ) for all i < j.
}} has a canonical decomposition
, any member of {{Qi∈1..n
Lemma 3.2.5 Given a prefix of the form Qi∈1..n
i
i
i∈1..n
◦
θi with θi ∈ {{Qi }}.
Canonical decompositions are interesting because any grouping (by associativity) is also canonical. Moreover,
they enjoy the following property:
INRIA

Recasting MLF

21

Figure 5: Type Congruence in iMLF.
iCon-AllLeft

iCon-AllRight

iCon-Arrow

(Q) σ1 R σ2
(Q) ∀(α ≥ σ1 ) σ R ∀(α ≥ σ2 ) σ

(Q, α ≥ σ) σ1 R σ2
(Q) ∀(α ≥ σ) σ1 R ∀(α ≥ σ) σ2

(Q) τ1 R τ2
(Q) τ1′ R τ2′
′
(Q) τ1 → τ1 R τ2 → τ2′

Lemma 3.2.6 If θ1 ◦ θ2 is a canonical decomposition of an F-substitution, then θ2 ◦ (θ1 ◦ θ2 ) = (θ1 ◦ θ2 ) ◦ θ1 =
(θ1 ◦ θ2 ).
Definition 3.2.7 (Type instance) The instance relation ≤ in iMLF is defined by (Q) σ1 ≤ σ2 if for all
θ ∈ {{Q}}, we have θ{{σ1 }} ⊇ θ{{σ2 }}. The equivalence relation ⊏
−
− is the kernel of ≤.
⊐
Remarkably, type instance treats both sides of the arrow symmetrically. Thus, the generalization of types to
allow arbitrary type constructors would not need a notion of variance for type constructors. Technically, type
instance does not directly operate under arrow types, similarly to ≤F and by contrast with both <: and ≤η .
However, it does operate inside bindings, which may indirectly affect arrow types. For instance, ∀(α≥σid ) τ → α
can be instantiated into ∀(α≥σid → σid ) τ → α which is equivalent to τ → (σid → σid ). However, τ → (σid → σid )
is not an instance of τ → σid . Thus, the replacement of τ → σid by ∀(α ≥ σid ) τ → α is a way to tell explicitly
within types that the right-hand side of the arrow may be instantiated. We could also write ∀(α ≥ σid ) α → τ
to allow instantiation on the left-hand side of the arrow, although such a type may not be more useful than
∀(α) α → τ . Much more interesting, we may allow instantiation on several occurrences simultaneously, as in
the type ∀(α ≥ σid ) α → α (of choose id). It is actually essential that type instantiation be allowed under arrow
types and simultaneously in several occurrences, so that programs such as choose id have principal types. It
is also important that this mechanism does not depend on variances of type constructors, which would prevent
the use of first-order unification for type inference.
Expanding the definition of equivalence, we have (Q) σ1 ⊏
−
− σ2 if and only if for all θ ∈ {{Q}}, we have
⊐
θ{{σ1 }} = θ{{σ2 }}. We simply write σ1 ⊏
−
− σ2 , when (∅) σ1 ⊏
⊐
−
− σ2 .
⊐
If ⌈τ1 ⌉ and ⌈τ2 ⌉ are equal, their semantics {{τ1 }} and {{τ2 }} are also equal, hence τ1 ⊏
−
− τ2 . (The only reason
⊐
why τ1 and τ2 may not coincide exactly is that F-types are taken modulo equivalence—see page 12.) We may
thus invert the definition ⌈·⌉ into a function from TF to Ti . For any type t in TF , we write ⌊t⌋ the type τ of Ti
defined up to equivalence such that t is ⌈τ ⌉. We extend the ⌊·⌋-mapping pointwise to F-substitutions, writing
⌊θ⌋ for the substitution α 7→ ⌊θ(α)⌋.
Type instance may also be defined on prefixes as follows.
Definition 3.2.8 (Prefix instance) We say that Q2 is an instance of Q1 and we write Q1 ≤ Q2 if {{Q1 }} ⊇
{{Q2 }}.

3.3

Syntactic versions of instance and equivalence

The semantic definition of type instance is not constructive, as it involves quantification over infinite sets. A
first step towards an algorithm for checking type instance is to provide an equivalent but syntactic definition of
type instance.
While semantic type equivalence is defined after type instance, as its kernel, it is simpler (and more intuitive)
to define syntactic type equivalence first, and syntactic type instance as a larger relation containing type
equivalence.
A judgment for a prefixed relation R is a triple written (Q) σ1 R σ2 . It is closed if free type variables of σ1
and σ2 are included in dom(Q) and Q is closed. We also say that the prefix Q is suitable for the judgment.
Definition 3.3.1 (Congruence) A relation R is ≥-congruent when it satisfies both iCon-AllLeft and
iCon-AllRight (Figure 5). It is congruent if it is ≥-congruent and moreover satisfies iCon-Arrow (Figure 5).
Lemma 3.3.2 Type instance is ≥-congruent. Type equivalence is congruent.

RR n° 6228

22

Rémy & Le Botlan

Figure 6: Syntactic type equivalence ⊏
−
− in iMLF.
⊐
iEqu-Comm

iEqu-Free

α1 ∈
/ ftv(σ2 )
α2 ∈
/ ftv(σ1 )
(Q) ∀(α1 ≥ σ1 ) ∀(α2 ≥ σ2 ) σ ⊏
−
− ∀(α2 ≥ σ2 ) ∀(α1 ≥ σ1 ) σ
⊐

α∈
/ ftv(σ)
(Q) ∀(α ≥ σ ′ ) σ ⊏
−
−σ
⊐

iEqu-Inert

(α ≥ σ ′ ) ∈ Q
(∅) σ ′ ⊏
−
−τ
⊐
(Q) σ ⊏
−
− σ[τ /α]
⊐

iEqu-Var

τ ∈ Ii

(Q) ∀(α ≥ σ) α ⊏
−
−σ
⊐

Definition 3.3.3 (Syntactic type equivalence) Syntactic type equivalence is the smallest reflexive, transitive, symmetric, and congruent relation on closed judgments satisfying the rules of Figure 6.
We intendedly use the same symbol ⊏
−
− for syntactic and semantic equivalence, because the two definitions
⊐
coincide, as explained below.
Rule iEqu-Comm allows for commutation of bindings with disjoint domains; Rule iEqu-Free allows for
removal of useless bindings; Rule iEqu-Inert allows for inlining of inert bindings (inert types are defined on
page 20). Rule iEqu-Var identifies ∀(α ≥ σ) α and σ, i.e. it states that a (possibly polymorphic) type σ stands
for all of its instances.
Interestingly, Rule iEqu-Inert allows for reification of a substitution [τ /α] as a prefix (α ≥ τ ). Actually,
any substitution can be represented as a prefix. This is a key technical point that is used in the presentation
of type inference and unification, where the solution of a unification problem is not a substitution but rather
a prefix, which is more general—see (Le Botlan and Rémy, 2003) or (Le Botlan, 2004, Chapter 3) for more
details.
Rules iEqu-Inert, iEqu-Free and iEqu-Var may be oriented from left to right and used as rewriting
rules to transform every type scheme σ into a normal form, up to commutation of binders—see (Le Botlan and
Rémy, 2003) or (Le Botlan, 2004, Chapter 1) for details.
Syntactic and semantic definitions of type equivalence coincide, as shown by Theorem 3.3.9 and Conjecture 3.3.13 below. Although these results will follow from similar results for type instance, they are easier to
prove in the case of type equivalence, hence we prove them independently. We first establish a few lemmas. We
remind the notation ∀(α) S introduced at the beginning of §3.2.
Lemma 3.3.4 If α ∈
/ ftv(σ), then ∀(α) {{σ}} ⊆ {{σ}} holds.
Lemma 3.3.5 For any F-substitution θ and type scheme σ, we have θ({{σ}}) ⊆ {{⌊θ⌋(σ)}}.
The converse inclusion only holds under some hypotheses on the occurrences of free type variables of σ that are
in dom(θ), which must not be exposed.
Definition 3.3.6 (Exposed type variables) Exposed type variables in a type scheme σ are free type variables etv(σ) that are reachable from the root of σ without crossing any type constructor (i.e. the arrow in our
setting), recursively defined as follows:
etv(α) = α

etv(τ → τ ) = ∅

etv(⊥) = ∅

etv(∀(α ≥ σ) σ ′ ) = (etv(σ ′ ) \ {α}) ∪ etv(σ)

For example α is exposed in ∀(β ≥ α) σ, but not in α → ∀(β) α.
Lemma 3.3.7 If α is not exposed in σ, then etv(σ) = etv(σ[τ /α]) holds for any τ .
Our interest is more in type variables that are not exposed, as substituting them is sound.
Lemma 3.3.8 Let σ be a type scheme and θ a substitution [t/α] such that either t is inert or α is not exposed
in σ. If t′ ∈ {{⌊θ⌋(σ)}} and α ∈
/ ftv(t′ ), then t′ ∈ θ({{σ}}).
This lemma is stated in the particular case of a singleton substitution. This is only to simplify its presentation.
Similarly, the condition α ∈
/ ftv(t′ ) may always be satisfied by appropriate renaming of σ and θ. On the opposite,
the two conditions on θ are more important and prevent cases where the lemma would not hold.
(Proof p. 55)

INRIA

Recasting MLF

23

Figure 7: Syntactic Type Instance ≤ in iMLF.
iIns-Equiv

(Q) σ1 ⊏
−
− σ2
⊐
(Q) σ1 ≤ σ2

iIns-Bot

(Q) ⊥ ≤ σ

iIns-Hyp

iIns-Subst

(α ≥ σ) ∈ Q
(Q) σ ≤ α

α∈
/ etv(σ)
(Q) ∀(α ≥ τ ) σ ≤ σ[τ /α]

Lemma 3.3.9 (Soundness of syntactic equivalence) The semantic type equivalence relation satisfies all
rules of Figure 6.
(Proof p. 56)

Definition 3.3.10 (Syntactic type instance) The syntactic instance relation is the smallest transitive and
≥-congruent relation on closed judgments satisfying rules of Figure 7.
We intendedly use the same symbol for syntactic and semantic type instance because the two definitions coincide,
as explained below.
Rule iIns-Equiv ensures that type instance contains type equivalence. Rule iIns-Bot states that ⊥ is
the most general type. Rule iIns-Hyp is obvious as a logical rule, as it just uses an hypothesis. Its effect is
to replace a type scheme by a variable that stands for an instance of that type scheme. As it can be used
repeatedly, its effect is often to join two flexible bindings that have the same bound (when used in combination
with flexible-congruence rules). iIns-Subst inlines a flexible binding (α ≥ τ ) with a type bound τ , thus settling
the choice made for τ . Type scheme bounds must be instantiated to types using flexible congruence before
they can be inlined. The side condition requires that variable α is not exposed in σ. This is to prevent cases
where α would appear in σ as a flexible bound. For example, without the side condition, one could derive
(Q) ∀(α ≥ τ ) ∀(β ≥ α) ∀(γ ≥ α) β → γ ≤ ∀(β ≥ τ ) ∀(γ ≥ τ ) β → γ, which implies (Q) ∀(α ≥ τ ) α → α ≤
∀(β ≥ τ ) ∀(γ ≥ τ ) β → γ and is certainly false: the semantics ensures that β and γ are substituted by the same
instance of τ on the left-hand side, but not on the right-hand side. Note that this condition also prevents the
case where σ is itself α, as in the type instance (Q) ∀(α ≥ τ ) α ≤ τ . However, this judgment is a particular case
of equivalence, and thus still provable using rule iIns-Equiv.
Instance derivations can be renamed, prefixes can be extended, and substitutions by equivalent types preserve
equivalence, as stated by the following Lemma.
Lemma 3.3.11 Assume R is ⊏
−
− or ≤.
⊐
i) The relation R satisfies both axioms Renaming and Extra-Bindings of page 13.
ii) If (Q) τ1 ⊏
−
− τ2 holds, then (Q) σ[τ1 /α] ⊏
⊐
−
− σ[τ2 /α] holds.
⊐

(Proof p. 56)

Lemma 3.3.12 (Soundness of syntactic instance) The type instance relation satisfies all rules of Figure 7.
(Proof p. 57)

An obvious question is whether the syntactic definitions of type equivalence and type instance are complete
for the corresponding semantic definitions.
Conjecture 3.3.13 (Completeness of syntactic relations) Any type equivalence relation can be derived
with rules of Figure 6. Any type instance relation can be derived with rules of Figure 7.
A proof of this conjecture has only been sketched, using an intermediate semantics of types based on a graphic
representation to factor all of their instances as a single and simple object—see discussion in §5. While showing
the equivalence of the two semantics should not be difficult, a description of the graph representation of types
is beyond the scope of this paper (see Rémy and Yakobowski (2007)) and a direct proof using the semantics of
this paper without referring to graphs would be too long and tedious.
This conjecture combined with Lemma 3.3.9 justifies our semantics of types. In the rest of the paper we
do not distinguish between syntactic and semantic relations and only say type equivalence or type instance.
However, we do not actually rely on this conjecture: we only use the soundness of the syntactic definitions
with respect to their semantics definitions, not their completeness. Therefore, reading type equivalence and type
instance as the syntactic versions hereafter is always technically correct and never relies on the conjecture.

RR n° 6228

24

3.4

Rémy & Le Botlan

Typing rules

As iMLF is an instance of System G, its typing rules are as described in Figure 4. Some examples of typings
have been introduced informally in §1. Other examples will be presented with more details in §3.7.
There is an interesting admissible rule in iMLF that helps typing abstractions:
iFun⋆

(Q) Γ, x : τ ⊢ a : σ
α∈
/ ftv(τ )
(Q) Γ ⊢ λ(x) a : ∀(α ≥ σ) τ → α
To see this, assume (Q) Γ, x : τ ⊢ a : σ. Let α be a variable that does not appear free in (Q). We have
(Q, α ≥ σ) Γ, x : τ ⊢ a : σ (1) by lemma 2.1.1.ii. We have (Q, α ≥ σ) σ ≤ α (2) by iIns-Hyp. By Rule Inst
with (1) and (2), we get (Q, α ≥ σ) Γ, x : τ ⊢ a : α. We conclude by Rule Fun followed by Rule Gen.
Generalized application
Rule Gen generalizes a binding by moving a binding from the prefix to the right-hand side. The converse rule
is in fact admissible.
UnGen⋆

(Q) Γ ⊢ a : ∀(α ≥ σ) σ ′
α∈
/ dom(Q)
(Q, α ≥ σ) Γ ⊢ a : σ ′
Indeed, assume (Q) Γ ⊢ a : ∀(α ≥ σ) σ ′ holds. Then, by Lemma 2.1.1.ii, we get (Q, α ≥ σ) Γ ⊢ a : ∀(α ≥ σ) σ ′ .
We conclude by Rule Inst and (Q, α ≥ σ) ∀(α ≥ σ) σ ′ ≤ σ ′ , as shown below:
∀(α ≥ σ) σ ′

(Q, α ≥ σ)

=
≤

∀(β ≥ σ) σ ′ [β/α]
∀(β ≥ α) σ ′ [β/α]

−
⊏
−
⊐

σ′

by α-conversion
by iIns-Hyp
and iCon-AllLeft
by iEqu-Inert

More interestingly, the following generalized application rule is also admissible—it is actually derivable with
repeated applications of admissible Rule UnGen⋆ on both premises, and an application of rule App followed
by an application of rule Gen:
App⋆

(Q) Γ ⊢ a1 : ∀(Q′ ) τ2 → τ1
(Q) Γ ⊢ a2 : ∀(Q′ ) τ2
(Q) Γ ⊢ a1 a2 : ∀(Q′ ) τ1
We refer to typing rules extended with App⋆ as generalized typing rules. We presented the system with Rule
App, rather than Rule App⋆ for economy of the formalization as well as for emphasizing the generic presentation
of the type system. However, the generalized typing rules, while defining the same judgments allow for more
derivations and so have actually more interesting modularity properties. In particular, we use the generalized
presentation in §3.7.
Recursion
There is no explicit construction for recursion in iMLF. From a typing point of view, recursion can always be
treated as the application of a fixed point combinator, given as a constant with its type scheme in the initial
typing environment. For instance, let rec f = λ(x) a1 in a2 in ML may be seen as let f = fix (λ(f ) λ(x) a1 ) in a2
where fix behaves, for instance, as
λ(f ) (λ(x) f (λ(y) x x y)) (λ(x) f (λ(y) x x y)).
and is assigned the type scheme ∀(γ ≥ ∀(αβ) α → β) (γ → γ) → γ. The derived typing rule is:
Rec⋆

(Q, Q′ ) Γ, f : τ ⊢ λ(x) a1 : τ
(Q) Γ, f : ∀(Q′ ) τ ⊢ a2 : τ2
(Q) Γ ⊢ let rec f = λ(x) a1 in a2 : τ2
This view implies that f must be assigned a type τ and not a type scheme while type checking a1 . Thus, f
may be used polymorphically during the recursion, but only with System-F polymorphism.
INRIA

Recasting MLF

25

Using a primitive construct for recursion would allow f to be assigned a type scheme, which would be slightly
more general. However, this extension would break the encoding of MLF into System F, described below in §3.6.
The key is that where f is assigned a type, the recursion itself can be seen as monomorphic, as every occurrence
of f in a1 sees f with the same polymorphic type, which may then be instantiated appropriately. By contrast,
when f is a type scheme σ, several occurrences of f in a1 may view f with different types (that are all instances
of σ, of course).

3.5

System F as a subset of (Simple) i MLF

We recall that Simple MLF is iMLF without terms with local bindings. Before showing the inclusion of System F
in Simple MLF, we show the inclusion of their instance relations.
Lemma 3.5.1 Assume t ≤F t′ holds. Then, (Q) ⌊t⌋ ≤ ⌊t′ ⌋ holds under any suitable prefix Q.

(Proof p. 57)

The next lemma states the inclusion of System F into Simple MLF.
The translation ⌊Γ⌋ of a typing context Γ into one of Simple MLF, is the pointwise translation of types, i.e.
⌊x : t⌋ is x : ⌊t⌋.

Theorem 1 Assume F :: Γ ⊢ a : t holds. Then, the judgment iMLF :: (Q) ⌊Γ⌋ ⊢ a : ⌊t⌋ holds under any prefix
Q binding the free variables of Γ and t.
(Proof p. 57)

3.6

Type soundness, by viewing i MLF as a subset of Flet

In this section, we introduce a new type system, called Flet that extends System F with let-bindings a la ML,
which is already large enough to contain iMLF. The language Flet is actually a subset of the more notorious
extension of System F with intersection types F∧ . The type soundness of F∧ , which is folklore knowledge, ensures
the type soundness of iMLF.
From ML and System F to Flet
The language ML extends simple types with type schemes, which can be used to factor out all the simple types of
an expression, and a specific rule for typechecking local bindings that takes advantage of type schemes. Namely,
while typechecking let x = a in a′ , the locally bound variables x may be assigned a type scheme ∀(α) τ rather
than a simple type τ , which amounts to assigning x the whole collection of simple types τ [τ ′ /α] where τ ′ ranges
over all types. This is the essence of the ML type system. Its simplicity lies in the fact that type schemes may
not be assigned to function parameters, hence, ML retains nearly the simplicity of simple types. Actually, it is
well-known that an expression is typable in ML if (and only if) it is typable with simple types after reduction
of all its local bindings, i.e. the replacement of let x = a in a′ by a′ [a/x] in any context. This reduction
always terminates but the resulting expression may be exponentially larger than the original one. Hence, this
operational view of ML is inefficient. It is not very modular either. Thus, it is never used in practice. However,
it provides ML with a very simple specification: ML is the closure of simple types by let-expansion8 .
Unfortunately, the empowering effect of the Let-Gen typing rule for local bindings becomes inoperative in
(the generic presentation of) System F. That is, it does not allow more programs to be well-typed than by seeing
local bindings let x = a1 in a2 as immediate applications (λ(x) a2 ) a1 . This is not a weakness of System F. It
simply follows from the fact that types are first-class (or, in our generic setting, that type schemes and types
are identical).
One may then consider the alternative definition of ML—the closure of simple types by let-expansion—and
apply it to System F. More precisely, we define Flet as the smallest superset of System F that contains all terms
let x = a1 in a2 such that both a1 and a2 [a1 /x] are in Flet . The requirement that a1 also be in Flet is to reject
terms such as let x = a1 in a2 where x would not appear in a2 and a1 could be any expression.
This definition is equivalent to adding the following typing rule to System F:
Let-Expand

(Q) Γ ⊢ a1 : σ1
(Q) Γ ⊢ a2 [a1 /x] : σ
(Q) Γ ⊢ let x = a1 in a2 : σ
8 Formally, this is only true if we restrict local bindings let x = a in a′ to cases where x appears at least once in a′ , or if we define
the closure more precisely, as done for the language Flet below.

RR n° 6228

26

Rémy & Le Botlan

Since let-reduction may duplicate let-redexes but not create new ones, it must terminate (by Levy’s finite
development theorem for the λ-calculus (Barendregt, 1984)). That is, a term of Flet may always be let-reduced
to a term of System F.
As for ML, this operational specification is not quite satisfactory. Fortunately, there is also a more direct
specification based on a very restricted use of intersection types, where intersections are only allowed in types
schemes. Consider the following instance of generic types:
τ ∈ TFlet ::= α | τ → τ | ∀(q) τ
σ ∈ SFlet ::= τ | σ ∧ σ

q ∈ QFlet ::= α :: ⋆

let

F

Flet types
type schemes
Flet bindings

and the instance relation ⩽Flet defined as the smallest transitive relation that treats ∧ as associative, commutative, contains ≤F and all pairs σ ∧ σ ′ ⩽Flet σ. Then, Flet may be equivalently defined by the generic system
G(TFlet , SFlet , QFlet , ⩽) extended with the following typing rule:
Inter

(Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ1
(Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ2
(Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ1 ∧ σ2
This system is a particular case of the extension of System F with intersection types studied by Pierce (1991)9 ,
which we refer to as F∧ . The language Flet is significantly weaker—but simpler—than F∧ . However, to the best
of our knowledge it has not be considered on its own.
Our main interest in Flet is that although it has a very simple and intuitive specification and is only a small
extension to System F, it is already a superset of MLF as we shall see in the next section.
Type soundness of Flet
Type soundness relates the static semantics of programs, i.e. well-typedness, to their dynamic semantics, i.e.
evaluation. In pure λ-calculus where all values are functions, evaluation may never go wrong except by looping.
Type soundness of System F ensures that well-typed programs are strongly normalizable.
However, most real languages allow loops or arbitrary recursion and contain interesting programs that
may not terminate. In this setting, well-typedness cannot ensure termination any longer. Simultaneously,
real languages also introduce non-functional values, and therefore other sources of errors such as applying a
non-functional value to some argument. Well-typedness must then prevent such errors from happening.
In this paper we do not define the dynamic semantics of expressions. We do not address type soundness
directly, but only indirectly by showing that well-typed expressions are also well-typed in Flet .
The type soundness of Flet follows from type soundness of F∧ . To the best of our knowledge, the type
soundness of F∧ , which is folklore knowledge, has never been published. While proving type soundness for Flet
directly should not raise any difficulty, this is out of the scope of this paper.
Encoding i MLF into Flet
We show that iMLF is a subset of Flet by translating typing derivations of iMLF into typing derivations of
Flet . For that purpose, we instrument typing judgments of iMLF (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ into judgments of the form
(Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ a : σ ∋ t ⇒ ∆ to mean “given an F-substitution θ in {{Q}}, and a type t in {{σ}}, the judgment
(Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ requires a context ∆”. These judgments may also be read as an algorithm that takes θ, t, and a
typing derivation of a (regular) typing judgment iMLF :: (Q) a ⊢ σ and returns a context ∆. These judgments
are defined by typing rules of Figure 8.
In the translation, we distinguish let-bound variables, written x, from λ-bound variables, written y. Hence,
the two rules iF-Var-Let and iF-Var-Fun corresponding to the usual unique rule for variables. Notice that
only the iF-Var-Let inserts a binding in ∆. The context ∆ maps let-bound variables to intersection types,
written ∧ti∈I
i . We write ∆1 ∧ ∆2 for the environment that maps x to ∆1 (x) ∧ ∆2 (x) when x is in both dom(∆1 )
and dom(∆2 ) or as ∆1 or ∆2 when x is in either dom(∆1 ) or dom(∆2 ). There are two rules for local bindings.
Rule iF-Let assumes that variable x appears free in a′ . The bound expression is typechecked as many times
as there are occurrences of x in a′ , which enables each occurrence to pick a different instance t of σ via rule iFVar-Let. Rule iF-Let-0 is for the degenerate case where x does not appear free in a′ . We must still typecheck
9 The presentation of Pierce (1991) is in Church style, but this is irrelevant here.

INRIA

Recasting MLF

27

Figure 8: Translating iMLF to Flet .
iF-Var-Let

iF-Var-Fun

iF-Fun

x:σ∈Γ
(Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ x : σ ∋ t ⇒ (x : t)

y:τ ∈Γ
(Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ y : τ ∋ t ⇒ ∅

(Q ∋ θ) Γ, y : τ ⊢ a : τ ′ ∋ ⌈τ ′ ⌉ ⇒ ∆
(Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ λ(y) a : τ → τ ′ ∋ ⌈τ → τ ′ ⌉ ⇒ ∆

iF-App

(Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ a1 : τ2 → τ1 ∋ ⌈τ2 → τ1 ⌉ ⇒ ∆1
(Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ a2 : τ2 ∋ ⌈τ2 ⌉ ⇒ ∆2
(Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ a1 a2 : τ1 ∋ ⌈τ1 ⌉ ⇒ ∆1 ∧ ∆2
iF-Inst

iF-Gen

(Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ a : σ ∋ t ⇒ ∆
(Q) σ ≤ σ ′
(Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ a : σ ′ ∋ t ⇒ ∆

α∈
/ ftv(Γ)
β̄ # dom(Q)
(Q, α ≥ σ ∋ θ ◦ [t/α]) Γ ⊢ a : σ ′ ∋ t′ ⇒ ∆
(Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ a : ∀(α ≥ σ) σ ′ ∋ ∀(β̄) t′ [t/α] ⇒ ∆

iF-Let-0

x∈
/ ftv(a′ )
(Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ a : σ ∋ t ⇒ ∆
(Q ∋ θ) Γ, x : σ ⊢ a′ : σ ′ ∋ t′ ⇒ ∆′
(Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ let x = a in a′ : σ ′ ∋ t′ ⇒ ∆ ∧ ∆′

iF-Let

((Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ a : σ ∋ ti ⇒ ∆i )i∈I
I 6= ∅
(Q ∋ θ) Γ, x : σ ⊢ a′ : σ ′ ∋ t′ ⇒ ∆, x : ∧(ti )i∈I

(Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ let x = a in a′ : σ ′ ∋ t′ ⇒ ∆ ∧ (∧∆i i∈I )

the premise once to ensure that a is well-typed—since in a call-by-value strategy a is evaluated even if its result
is to be discarded. Other rules are straightforward. By convention, all judgments (Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ a : σ ∋ t ⇒ ∆
carry the implicit side-conditions θ ∈ {{Q}} and θ(t) ∈ θ({{σ}}).
The following lemma justifies our suggestion to read these judgments as an algorithm.
Lemma 3.6.1 If the judgment (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ holds, then for any θ in {{Q}} and t in {{σ}}, there exists a context
∆ such that (Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ a : σ ∋ t ⇒ ∆ holds.
Notice that, by construction, neither {{Q}} nor {{σ}} may be empty.

(Proof p. 57)

The next two lemmas show the soundness of iMLF by translation into Flet , which is itself sound. We define
{{Γ}} as {y : ⌈τ ⌉ | y : τ ∈ Γ}. Notice that bindings with true type schemes are not in {{Γ}}; they will be replaced
by bindings with conjunctive types in some additional environment ∆.
Lemma 3.6.2 If the judgment (Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ a : σ ∋ t ⇒ ∆ holds, then Flet :: θ({{Γ}}), ∆ ⊢ a : θ(t) holds.

(Proof p. 58)

Theorem 2 iMLF is a subset of Flet . More precisely, if the judgment iMLF :: (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ holds, then for any
θ in {{Q}} and τ in {{σ}}, there exists a context ∆ such that the judgment Flet :: θ({{Γ}}), ∆ ⊢ a : θ(t) holds.
(Proof p. 58)

Type Soundness. Type soundness is a corollary of Theorem 2, as it ensures that iMLF is as safe as Flet ,
which is itself as safe as F∧ , which is safe.
Discussion. As a particular case of the previous lemma, Simple MLF is a subset of System F, since terms
of Flet without local bindings are also in F. The converse is also true, as shown in the previous section. In
particular, Simple MLF and F coincide—regarding the sets of typable terms. We may summarize this section
and the previous one with the inclusions
Simple iMLF ⊆ F ⊆ Simple iMLF ⊂ iMLF ⊂ Flet .
We already know that at least one of the two last inclusions is strict, as the term aω
IK defined as let y = ω in
K (y I) (y K) is in Flet (as it let-reduces to a term in F) but it is not in F (Giannini and Rocca, 1988). (Notice
n
ω
that aω
IK is in any higher-order extension F of F for n > 2, hence also in F .)

RR n° 6228

28

Rémy & Le Botlan

In fact, the two inclusions are strict. We shall show an example that is typable in MLF but not in System F
F
in the following subsection. We now argue (informally) that aω
IK is not in ML .
Intuitively, Rule Inter is much more powerful than rule iF-Let since a conjunctive type may be an arbitrary
(finite) set of types in Inter, whereas iF-Let only allows to form conjunctions between types that belong to a
F
common type scheme. To see that aω
IK is not in ML , we may reproduce the argument used for F by Giannini
F
and Rocca (1988) by analyzing all possible derivations of aω
IK in ML . In fact, the parameter y will be assigned a
type σ that must be a type for ω. In turn, as the parameter x of ω is used polymorphically, it must be assigned
an exact type, hence σ is of the form ∀(α1 ⇒ σ1 ) ∀(α2 ⋄ σ2 ) α1 → α2 where σ1 must be a System-F type ⌊t⌋.
Reproducing the reasoning of Giannini and Rocca (1988) (see also Pierce (2002, §23) and Wells (1999)), t must
be of the form ∀(α) .(. . . (α → tn ) → . . . t1 ) → t0 . However, no type of this form can be simultaneously a type
F
for I and K, as required by the two uses of y. In fact, the term aω
IK is not typable in Full ML either.
Subject reduction. The subject reduction property holds in Simple iMLF as a consequence of the twodirectional encoding between System F and Simple iMLF.
We expect subject reduction to hold in iMLF, since it holds in Full MLF (Le Botlan, 2004). However, we did
not check this result, as type soundness has already been established by encoding iMLF into Flet in §3.6.

3.7

Expressiveness and modularity

As typing derivations of System F can be mapped directly to typing derivations of iMLF, the language iMLF
performs at least as well as System F with regard to typechecking. We claim that iMLF is strictly more expressive
than System F in a rather unusual but practically meaningful sense, as it is more modular than System F. Indeed,
we show that constructing data structures containing polymorphic values is not modular in System F, while it
is in iMLF.
For that purpose, we exhibit an unannotated expression b, which, as far as typing is concerned, can be
compared to a data structure, say a list, containing a polymorphic value, say id. This expression is typable
in System F, hence also in iMLF. Then, b is inserted10 both into a monomorphic data structure (for the sake
of conciseness, we use constants in expressions) and into a (truly) polymorphic data structure. In System F,
though, two typing derivations are necessary for b, depending on the type of the data structure it will be inserted
into. Worse, the number of differences between both typing derivations is proportional to the size of b. On the
contrary, in iMLF, we show that the very same derivation can be used for b in both cases. (This is of course
simply a consequence of principal types.)
We actually consider the generalized presentation of iMLF, using Rule App⋆ rather than App. We could also
argue in the original system, but with a more careful definition of modularity. For fairness of comparison, we
consider the implicit version of System F. The result can only be (significantly) worsened in explicit System F,
as not only typing derivations of progams will have to be changed, but also some of their type abstractions and
type applications.
Although our statement is based on a particular example—we do not actually prove that changes in the
derivation must be non local but argue informally—it is also seconded by formal results in Le Botlan’s thesis (Le Botlan, 2004) where it is shown how a single type of eMLF captures all type abstractions and type
applications of a given expression in System F. However, this formal result uses the principal type property
of eMLF, which we do not show here, as we do not address type inference—hence, our informal, but simpler
explanation.
Although the following example is presented in iMLF and based on the modularity of typing derivations,
it can be reproduced in eMLF since only type annotations on function parameters are needed in eMLF and all
other type information can be reconstructed in a principal manner.
In fact, we exhibit a sequence of expressions (an )n∈IN of increasing size, defined inductively. So as to ease
the presentation, we assume that the core language is extended with a ground type i (such as int) and that
the initial environment Γ0 contains the functions choose, id, comp, and ω that satisfy the following signature in
iMLF (their signature in System F follows by translation).
choose
id
comp
ω

:
:
:
:

∀(α) α → α → α
∀(α) α → α
(i → i) → (i → i)
σid → σid

△

= σid
△
= σcomp
△
= σω

10 Insertion is modeled by mere application.

INRIA

Recasting MLF

29

For instance, comp could be the expression λ(g) (λ(x) g (succ x)) where succ is the successor function for
integers. From a typing point of view, we claim that choose is similar to a datatype constructor. Indeed,
choose v w can be compared to the two-element list [v; w], since v and w are required to have the same type.
Of course, choose v w does not behave as a list, since it forgets its elements after application (at least one of
them). Similarly, choose v can be compared to the singleton list [v]. In particular, the typing of choose id raises
the same difficulties than the typing of [id] as far as the position of quantifiers is concerned : namely, is its type
list(σid ), or ∀(α) list(α → α), or even ∀(α) list(∀(β) (α → β) → (α → β)?
We now define a sequence of expressions an and a sequence of types σ n parametrized by an initial expression
a for a0 and an initial closed type σ for σ 0 .
△

a0 = a

△

an+1 = choose an

△

σ0 = σ

△

σ n+1 = ∀(α ≥ σ n ) α → α

(From a typing point of view, an behaves as [..[a]..], the nested singleton list ending at depth n with a as a leaf.)
Assume Γ0 ⊢ an : σ n (1). By lemma 2.1.1.i (page 13), we have (α ≥ σ n ) Γ0 ⊢ an : σ n (2). Then, we have the
following derivation of Γ0 ⊢ an+1 : σ n+1 (3) in iMLF:
Inst

(α ≥ σ n ) Γ0 ⊢ choose : ∀(α) α → α → α
(2)
(α ≥ σ n ) σ n ≤ α
Inst
(α ≥ σ n ) Γ0 ⊢ choose : α → α → α
(α ≥ σ n ) Γ0 ⊢ an : α
App
(α ≥ σ n ) Γ0 ⊢ choose an : α → α
Gen
(3)

Hence, by induction judgement (1) holds for every integer n provided Γ0 ⊢ a : σ holds. Observe that, by
construction, we have Γ0 ⊢ id : σid (4), Γ0 ⊢ comp : σcomp (5), and Γ0 ⊢ ω: σω (6).
n
Assume moreover that σid ≤ σ. Using Rule iCon-AllLeft repeatedly, we obtain σid
≤ σ n . In particular,
n+1
n+1
n+1
n
σid ≤ ∀(α ≥ σ ) α → α (7). Let b be id
. We have Γ ⊢ b : σid , which gives Γ ⊢ b : ∀(α ≥ σ n ) α → α
by Rule Inst and (7). Using generalized Rule App⋆ we have Γ0 ⊢ b an : σ n (8). As both σω and σcomp are
instances of σid , we may thus conclude that both applications b ω n and b compn are typable in iMLF. More
importantly, the typing derivations of b are the same for both terms—only the typing of the arguments and
final application differs. The key point here is that the instantiation of the type of b may be delayed as much
as possible. This is possible only because of the expressiveness of types and of the instance relation of iMLF.
In System F, both applications are typable as well, but unlike in iMLF, the typing derivations of b are
significantly different. In particular, each node of the typing derivation tree differs up to the leaves, i.e. up
to the typing of the expression id. Indeed, the type applications required at each application node are always
different in both derivations. We see that a single difference in the unannotated term occurring at an arbitrary
depth in the argument of the application idn+1 ω n (compared to idn+1 compn ) induces changes in the typing of
the body of the function an+1 up to depth n.
As explained above, this example can easily be read back with lists. More generally, it shows that when
incrementally building a collection of objects in MLF, each intermediate collection may be kept as polymorphic
as possible, since it can be seen as a collection of a less polymorphic values at any time and at no cost. In
particular, a new element that is less polymorphic than the previous elements of the collection may later be
added to the collection. By contrast, in System F, one must know the best common type of all the elements
before collecting the very first one.
To wrap up the example, it follows that the expressions anlet defined as let x = idn+1 in let z = x ω n in x compn
for any n, and, as a particular case, the expression let x = choose id in let z = x ω in x comp are not typable in
System F. They are all typable in iMLF, indeed.
Notice that although Flet is larger than iMLF, it is not necessarily better: while anlet is also typable in Flet its
typing derivation in Flet is still problematic as the typing derivation for id contains two similar sub-derivations
specialized for ω and comp, respectively, and joined with ∧ rather than a principal typing derivation independent
of further applications, as could be done in iMLF. The analysis of the open world modular problem described
by an when n increases is more informative about modularity than that of the closed expression anlet .
Remark also that anλ defined as app (λ(x) let z = x ω n in x compn ) idn+1 does not typecheck in iMLF, as the
argument idn+1 must be assigned a type scheme and not a type. However, this example typechecks in Full MLF.
In summary, the main benefit of iMLF over System F is that its types are more principal, so that typing
derivations of iMLF are more modular than typing derivations in System F. This is a key for the design of eMLF
that permits simple type inference. In fact, many modularity properties of iMLF are kept in eMLF (see type
preserving transformations in §4.5).
RR n° 6228

30

4

Rémy & Le Botlan

eMLF, Church-style MLF

In this section, we step on modular typechecking properties of iMLF to design a version with optional type
annotations, called eMLF, that has a clear and intuitive specification of where and when to put type annotations.
After a presentation of eMLF types (§4.1) and relations between them, we introduce terms, typing rules and show
type safety (§4.2) by translation of well-typed programs into iMLF. We also exhibit a translation of System F
into eMLF that shows the intrinsic expressiveness of eMLF and its very low demand on the amount of explicit
type information (§4.3). We show that eMLF is a conservative extension to ML (§4.4). Finally, we present a few
useful program transformations that are type preserving in eMLF (§4.5).

Specifying where and when to put type annotations
In iMLF, no type annotation is ever given. As a consequence, type inference is undecidable, just like in implicit
System F. In order to make type inference decidable, we need some annotations to be mandatory. Our guideline
is:
Only function parameters that are used polymorphically need an annotation.
This implies that types of annotated arguments are distinguishable from those of unannotated arguments. The
solution is to have two different ways of representing a given type: one for explicit type information and another
one for inferred type information. Unlike previous works, no explicit coercion is however needed to cast the
former into the latter. Types that are explicitly introduced with type annotations are represented directly with
a type scheme σ, as usual. On the contrary, types that have been inferred are represented indirectly via a
variable α that is rigidly bound to a type scheme σ in the prefix. This means that α stands for the type σ, but
α may not be freely replaced by σ or an instance of σ. Still, values of type α can be merged with other values
of type σ, by “weakening them to the abstract type α”—and not conversely. This operation, called abstraction
and written ⊏
−, plays a crucial role with respect to type inference. The converse relation, implicitly recasting
an abstract variable α to its bound σ is not permitted, as it would allow—and hence force—type inference to
guess (impredicative) polymorphic types and, as a result, make it undecidable. However, as this operation is
always sound, it may be performed explicitly via a type annotation.

4.1

Types, prefixes, and type relations

We remind the definition of types and prefixes below, so as to make this section self-contained:
τ ∈ Te ::= α | τ → τ

eMLF types

σ ∈ Se ::= τ | ∀(q) σ | ⊥

eMLF type schemes
eMLF bindings

ρ ∈ Re ::= τ | ∀(α ≥ ⊥) ρ | ∀(α ⇒ ρ) ρ

F-like type schemes

q ∈ Qe ::= α ≥ σ | α ⇒ ρ

As in ML, monotypes are simple types, for the purpose of type inference. This contrasts with System F or iMLF,
for which type inference is not considered.
We use the symbol ⋄ as a meta-variable that denotes either ≥ or ⇒. For example, (α ⋄ σ) stands for either
(α ⇒ σ) or (α ≥ σ), which are called rigid (resp. flexible) bindings. We also say that α is rigidly (resp. flexibly)
bound. A prefix that contains only rigid bindings is called rigid. The rigid domain of a prefix Q, written
dom= (Q), is the set of α such that α is rigidly bound in Q.
Notice that eMLF types do not form a superset of iMLF types, since for type inference purposes, they cannot
have quantifiers. This may be surprising. However, all of iMLF types have a counterpart in eMLF (as implied
by Theorem 4). For instance, the iMLF type (∀(α1 ) τ1 ) → (∀(α2 ) τ2 ) is not an eMLF type. However, it can be
represented as the eMLF type ∀(β1 ⇒ σ1 , β2 ⇒ σ2 ) β1 → β2 via extra rigid bindings. In fact, eMLF types are
more precise as there may be several types of eMLF mapped to the same iMLF type. This refinement of types
is used in eMLF to distinguish polymorphism that is given from polymorphism that is assumed.
Inert types Ie . A type is inert if it is of the form ∀(Q) τ , where τ ∈
/ ϑ and Q is rigid. The set of inert types
is written Ie . This definition is indeed the counterpart of inert types Ii in iMLF.
INRIA

Recasting MLF

31

Figure 9: Type Congruence in eMLF.
eCon-FlexLeft

eCon-AllLeft

eCon-AllRight

(Q) σ1 R σ2
(Q) ∀(α ≥ σ1 ) σ R ∀(α ≥ σ2 ) σ

(Q) σ1 R σ2
(Q) ∀(α ⋄ σ1 ) σ R ∀(α ⋄ σ2 ) σ

(Q, α ⋄ σ) σ1 R σ2
(Q) ∀(α ⋄ σ) σ1 R ∀(α ⋄ σ) σ2

Figure 10: Type Equivalence in eMLF.
eEqu-Comm

eEqu-Free

eEqu-Mono

α1 ∈
/ ftv(σ2 )
α2 ∈
/ ftv(σ1 )
(Q) ∀(α1 ⋄1 σ1 ) ∀(α2 ⋄2 σ2 ) σ ≡ ∀(α2 ⋄2 σ2 ) ∀(α1 ⋄1 σ1 ) σ

α∈
/ ftv(σ)
(Q) ∀(α ⋄ σ ′ ) σ ≡ σ

(α ⋄ τ ) ∈ Q
(Q) σ ≡ σ[τ /α]

eEqu-Inert
eEqu-Var

(Q) ∀(α ⋄ σ) α ≡ σ

σ ∈ Ie
(Q) ∀(α ≥ σ) σ ′ ≡ ∀(α ⇒ σ) σ ′

Relations between types. The equivalence and instance relations in iMLF are adapted to eMLF to deal with
rigid bindings. As explained earlier 2.3, type equivalence ⊏
−
− in iMLF is too large to permit type inference and
⊐
has been split into two inverse relations: abstraction ⊏
− and revelation ⊐
− . More precisely, type equivalence ⊏
−
−
⊐
in iMLF corresponds to the transitive closure of ⊏
−∪⊐
−, while type equivalence ≡ in eMLF is ⊏
−∩⊐
−. Moreover,
− is a subrelation of type instance, and may be left implicit in programs. Conversely, uses of ⊐
⊏
− must be made
explicit, via type annotations.
We now present the equivalence, abstraction, and instance relations formally and in this order, from the
smaller to the larger relations, as their definitions depend on these inclusions.
Definition 4.1.1 (Congruence) A relation R is ≥-congruent if it satisfies both eCon-FlexLeft and eConAllRight (Figure 9). It is congruent if it satisfies both eCon-AllLeft and eCon-AllRight.
Definition 4.1.2 (Equivalence) The equivalence relation, written ≡, is the smallest congruent equivalence
relation satisfying the rules of Figure 10.
Rules of Figure 10 are straightforward adaptations of those on Figure 6. The only difference is the replacement
of single ≥ bound in iMLF by the two possible bounds ≥ or ⇒ in eMLF. Rule iEqu-Inert is split into two
rules : eEqu-Mono inlines directly monotypes, whereas eEqu-Inert uses a rigid binding as an alias for an
inert type σ (since direct substitution would not be possible in general).
We remind that ϑ is the set of type variables. We write V for the set of type schemes that are ≡-equivalent
to a variable under the empty prefix. In fact, it is convenient to have a notation for the top-most structure of
a type scheme.
Definition 4.1.3 (Head) The head of a type scheme σ is the symbol or variable, written head(σ), defined
inductively as follows:
(
head(σ1 ), if head(σ2 ) = α
△
△
△
△
head(α) = α
head(τ1 → τ2 ) = →
head(⊥) = ⊥
head(∀(α ⋄ σ1 ) σ2 ) =
head(σ2 ), otherwise
The head of a type scheme is preserved by equivalence under an empty prefix. Hence, the heads of all elements
of V are type variables. We can show the converse—a type scheme σ, the head of which is a type variable, is
in V—by an easy structural induction on σ. Hence, V is also the set {σ ∈ S | head(σ) ∈ ϑ} of type schemes the
head of which are type variables.
Rigid bindings are used to abstract explicit type schemes as implicit ones, by storing and sharing their
definition via the prefix. The abstraction relation ⊏
− describes whenever a type scheme is more abstract than
another one.
RR n° 6228

32

Rémy & Le Botlan

Figure 11: Type Abstraction in eMLF.
eAbs-Equiv

eAbs-Hyp

(Q) σ1 ≡ σ2

(α ⇒ σ) ∈ Q
(Q) σ ⊏
−α

(Q) σ1 ⊏
−♯ σ2

eAbs-Left

eAbs-SharpLeft

(Q) σ1 ⊏
−♯ σ2

(Q) ∀(α ≥ σ1 ) σ ′ ⊏
−♯ ∀(α ≥ σ2 ) σ ′

(Q) σ1 ⊏
− σ2

σ′ ∈
/V

(Q) ∀(α ⇒ σ1 ) σ ′ ⊏
−♯ ∀(α ⇒ σ2 ) σ ′

eAbs-SharpDrop

(Q) σ1 ⊏
−♯ σ2
(Q) σ1 ⊏
− σ2

To explain abstraction, we introduce type scheme contexts, written S, as a type scheme with a single hole
“ · ”, which may be defined by the following BNF grammar:
S ::= · | ∀(α ⋄ S) σ | ∀(α ⋄ σ) S
Abstraction is essentially structural, except for the key axiom that retrieves an assumption from the prefix
(Rule eAbs-Hyp of Figure 11). However, a peculiarity of abstraction is that it is congruent only in all contexts
ending with a true rigid binding, that is, type scheme contexts of the form ∀(α ⇒ · ) σ where σ is not equivalent
to α. This condition is ensured by the stronger requirement σ ∈
/ V of Rule eAbs-SharpLeft.
Omitting the condition would allow pathological contexts such as ∀(β ≥ ∀(α ⇒ · ) α) τ , which are equivalent
to ∀(β ≥ · ) τ . In particular, this would allow to conclude (Q) ∀(α ≥ σ1 ) τ ⊏
− ∀(α ≥ σ2 ) τ from (Q) σ1 ⊏
− σ2 . For
example, we would have (α⇒σ) ∀(β≥σ) τ ⊏
− ∀(β≥α) τ , which implies ∀(α⇒σ) ∀(β≥σ) τ ⊏
− ∀(α⇒σ) ∀(β≥α) τ ,
i.e. ∀(α ⇒ σ) ∀(β ≥ σ) τ ⊏
− ∀(α ⇒ σ) τ [α/β], by Rule eCon-AllRight. However, this is unsound with respect
to its counter-part in ≤. To see this, take σid for σ and β → α for τ . We would have ∀(α ⇒ σid ) ∀(β ≥ σid ) β →
α⊏
− ∀(α ⇒ σid ) α → α in eMLF while ∀(β ≥ σid ) σid → β ≡ σid → σid does not hold in iMLF. This is indeed
incorrect, as it would allow the other direction ∀(α ⇒ σid ) α → α ⊐
− ∀(α ⇒ σid ) ∀(β ≥ σid ) β → α to be used
explicitly via an annotation, and so make (ω † : σid ) ω † well-typed, which is of course incorrect as its evaluation
loops. (Perhaps, another more intuitive example using primitive integers is (ω † : σid ) succ.)
Intuitively, a rigid binding behaves as a protection that prevents the underlying type from ever being
instantiated and, as a consequence, allows it to be abstracted. Technically, we need to keep track of protected
abstractions, as only those can be used in unprotected flexible contexts. For that purpose, we use an auxiliary
relation ⊏
−♯ , called protected abstraction, that is recursively defined with the (unprotected) abstraction relation
−.
⊏
Definition 4.1.4 (Abstraction) The abstraction relation ⊏
− and the protected abstraction relation ⊏
−♯ are the
smallest transitive relations satisfying the rules of Figure 11 and Rule eCon-AllRight.
Rules may be read by first ignoring the difference between ⊏
− and ⊏
−♯ , then realizing that the distinction only
prevents uses of eAbs-Hyp in pathological contexts for the reason explained above.
In fact, an alternative presentation is to remove Rule eEqu-Inert from the equivalence, and instead add a
rule eAbs-Inert
eAbs-Inert

σ ∈ Ie

(Q) ∀(α ≥ σ) σ ′ ⊏
−♯ ∀(α ⇒ σ) σ ′
This only slightly weakens the equivalence relation (inert types can then only be changed from flexible to rigid
bound and not conversely). It changes the set of types a program has, but does not change the set of typable
programs. The advantage of this alternate presentation is a simplification of equivalence which then only deals
with commutation and removal of useless binders and inlining of monomorphic nodes. It also seems more
natural in the graphical presentation of MLF (Yakobowski, 2008)—as all other operations on inert types must
remain part of abstraction. However, we prefer here to stay with the (slightly) larger equivalence relation.
Whereas the abstraction relation ⊏
− can abstract a type scheme into a variable (see Rule eAbs-Hyp), the
protected abstraction ⊏
−♯ cannot do the same, except in degenerate cases:
Lemma 4.1.5 If (Q) σ1 ⊏
−♯ σ2 and either σ1 ∈ V or σ2 ∈ V, then (Q) σ1 ≡ σ2 .
INRIA

Recasting MLF

33

Figure 12: Type Instance in eMLF.
eIns-Abstract

eIns-Hyp

(Q) σ1 ⊏
− σ2
(Q) σ1 ⊑ σ2

(α ≥ σ) ∈ Q
(Q) σ ⊑ α

eIns-Bot

eIns-Rigid

(Q) ⊥ ⊑ σ

(Q) ∀(α ≥ ρ) σ ′ ⊑ ∀(α ⇒ ρ) σ ′

The instance relation differs from the one of iMLF in only two minor ways. Firstly, it extends not only
the equivalence but also the abstraction relation. Secondly, Rule iIns-Subst, which would no longer be wellformed, has been replaced by eIns-Rigid, introducing a rigid binding instead of performing the substitution in
the conclusion. Other rules in Figure 12 are directly taken from those of iMLF (Figure 7).
Definition 4.1.6 (Instance) The instance relation, written ⊑, is the smallest transitive and ≥-congruent relation satisfying the rules of Figure 12.
Notice the inclusions (≡) ⊆ (⊏
−♯ ) ⊆ (⊏
−) ⊆ (⊑).
The next lemma shows that instantiating (and a fortiori abstracting) a type τ has no effect up to equivalence,
in contrast with abstraction of type schemes.
Lemma 4.1.7 For any type τ and type scheme σ, if (Q) τ ⊑ σ holds, then (Q) τ ≡ σ. Besides, there exists a
type τ ′ such that (∅) σ ≡ τ ′ .
Soundness of instance and abstraction relations
The type soundness of eMLF is shown below by a translation of well-typed eMLF programs into well-typed iMLF
ones, which in turn requires a translation of types and relations on types.
Trivial bindings such as (β ≥ α) often lead to pathological cases, as they are just redirections. As a consequence, we often need to consider type schemes of V in a special way. While we write σ ∈ V (or σ ≡ β when
the identifier β is meaningful) for conciseness and clarity, this can always be understood—and computed—as
head(σ) ∈ ϑ (or head(σ) = β).
Definition 4.1.8 (Type projection) The projection of an eMLF type into an iMLF type is defined as follows:
△

Tτ U = τ
△
T⊥U = ⊥

△

T∀(α ⇒ σ1 ) σ2 U = (
Tσ2 U[Tσ1 U/α]
Tσ2 U[β/α]
△
T∀(α ≥ σ1 ) σ2 U =
∀(α ≥ Tσ1 U) Tσ2 U

if σ1 ≡ β
if σ1 ∈
/V

The projection of a monotype τ is τ itself and the projection of ⊥ is ⊥. A binding (α ⇒ σ1 ) is translated to
a substitution [Tσ1 U/α], which is well-formed as Tσ1 U is an F-like type. A binding (α ≥ σ1 ) is translated to
(α ≥ Tσ1 U), unless it is a trivial one, in which case the corresponding substitution is performed.
An important property of the projection is, intuitively, that the projection of a type that is not itself a type
variable never contains exposed type variables (defined in §3.3.6).
Lemma 4.1.9 The set of exposed type variables of TσU is included in the singleton {head(σ)}.
Whereas the projection of an eMLF type is an iMLF type, the projection of an eMLF prefix Q is a pair
composed of an iMLF prefix that corresponds to flexible bindings of Q and a substitution that captures the rigid
bindings of Q. Special care is again needed for trivial bindings.
Definition 4.1.10 (Prefix projection) The projection of a prefix Q is a pair (Q, θ), defined inductively as
follows:
TQU = (Q′ , θ)
TQU = (Q′ , θ)
TσU ∈
/V
△
T∅U = (∅, id)
△
△
′
′
T(Q, α ⇒ σ)U = (Q , θ ◦ [TσU/α])
TQ, (α ≥ σ)U = ((Q , α ≥ θTσU), θ)
TQU = (Q′ , θ)
△

TσU ≡ β

TQ, (α ≥ σ)U = (Q′ , θ ◦ [β/α])
RR n° 6228

34

Rémy & Le Botlan

The following lemma states that type equivalence, type abstraction, and type instance relation are all preserved
by projections into iMLF.
Lemma 4.1.11 Let (Q′ , θ) be TQU. We have the following implications
i) If (Q) σ1 ≡ σ2 , then (Q′ ) θTσ1 U ⊏
−
− θTσ2 U.
⊐
ii) If (Q) σ1 ⊏
− σ2 , then (Q′ ) θTσ1 U ⊏
−
− θTσ2 U.
⊐
iii) If (Q) σ1 ⊑ σ2 , then (Q′ ) θTσ1 U ≤ θTσ2 U.

(Proof p. 58)

Properties 4.1.11.ii and 4.1.14.i show that the relations ⊏
−
− and (⊏
⊐
−∪⊐
−)∗ are in correspondence. They were also
used indirectly to show Property 4.1.11.iii. Only Property 4.1.11.iii is further used, namely to show the close
correspondence between iMLF and eMLF.
Completeness of instance and abstraction relations
We may conversely show that type instance and type abstraction in eMLF capture no more than type instance
and type equivalence in iMLF.
Let us first introduce a translation from iMLF types to eMLF ones, written VσW, defined inductively as follows:
△

VαW = α

△

V⊥W = ⊥

△

V∀(α ≥ σ) σ ′ W = ∀(α ≥ VσW) Vσ ′ W

△

Vτ1 → τ2 W = ∀(α1 ⇒ Vτ1 W, α2 ⇒ Vτ2 W) α1 → α2

The translation of variables, ⊥, and flexible bindings are by a direct mapping. The translation of an arrow
type τ1 → τ2 uses auxiliary bindings (α1 ⇒ Vτ1 W, α2 ⇒ Vτ2 W), since Vτ1 W and Vτ2 W are guaranteed to be ρ-types,
but not necessarily monotypes. In case they are monotypes, the extra indirection is not problematic, as it can
always be eliminated by type-equivalence in eMLF.
The translation of an iMLF binding (α ≥ σ) is a binding (α ⋄ VσW) that is rigid if and only if σ is equivalent
to an inert type. Formally,
(
(α ⇒ VσW) if there exists τ ∈ Ii such that (∅) σ ⊏
−
−τ
⊐
V(α ≥ σ)W =
(α ≥ VσW) otherwise
Checking if a type scheme σ is equivalent to an inert type can be performed quite easily, for example by taking
normal forms—see Le Botlan (2004) for details. The translation of a prefix Q is the pointwise translation of its
bindings.
As a preliminary result, we show that inert substitution in iMLF is captured by the symmetric closure of
abstraction in eMLF:
Lemma 4.1.12 Let σ be an iMLF type scheme and Q be an iMLF prefix such that (α ≥ σ ′ ) ∈ Q with (∅)
Vσ ′ W (⊏
−♯ ∪ ⊐
−♯ )∗ Vτ W and τ ∈ Ii . Then, we have (VQW) VσW (⊏
−♯ ∪ ⊐
−♯ )∗ Vσ[τ /α]W in eMLF.
(Proof p. 59)

Lemma 4.1.13 Let τ be an iMLF type, σ be an iMLF type scheme, and Q an eMLF prefix. Then, we have
(Q) ∀(α ⇒ Vτ W) VσW (⊏
−♯ ∪ ⊐
−♯ )∗ Vσ[τ /α]W in eMLF.
We may now show that type instance and type equivalence in iMLF map to type instance and the symmetric
closure of type abstraction in eMLF.
Lemma 4.1.14
i) If (Q) σ1 ⊏
−
− σ2 , then (VQW) Vσ1 W (⊏
⊐
−♯ ∪ ⊐
−♯ )∗ Vσ2 W.
ii) If (Q) σ1 ≤ σ2 , then (VQW) Vσ1 W (⊑ ∪ ⊐
−)∗ Vσ2 W.

4.2

(Proof p. 59)

Terms, typing rules, and type soundness

Terms of eMLF are those of iMLF extended with a new primitive construction for type annotations (a : ∃ (ᾱ) σ).
Notice that the existential ∃ (ᾱ) σ is not an existential type, but a syntactic notation for introducing metavariables ᾱ standing for some types σ̄ ′ appearing in σ to be inferred, as can be done in the language ML (Pottier
and Rémy 2003, page 102; Jones and Shields 2004a). That is, the BNF grammar of expressions of eMLF is:
a ::= x | λ(x) a | a1 a2 | let x = a1 in a2
(a : ∃ (ᾱ) σ)

Expressions of iMLF
Type annotations
INRIA

Recasting MLF

35

Figure 13: eMLF typing rules
Var

Fun

App

Gen

Let

Annot
Inst

(Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ
(Q) σ ⊑ σ ′
(Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ ′

ᾱ ⊆ dom(Q)
(Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ ′
(Q) σ ⊏
− σ′
(Q) Γ ⊢ (a : ∃ (ᾱ) σ) : σ

The typing rules of eMLF, given in Figure 13, include all rules from the generic system G(Te , Se , Qe , ⊑) and a
new rule for type annotations. Notice, that the generic rule Inst is specialized, accordingly, using the relation ⊑
for type instance. Rule Annot is thus the only interesting rule in eMLF. The existentially quantified variables ᾱ
in annotations are used to allow annotations to partially specify the type of the expression they annotate: their
bounds are left unspecified (equivalently ᾱ could be given a flexible bottom bound in the annotation) and thus
must be inferred. Free type variables of σ must all be listed in ᾱ, so that the annotation ∃ (ᾱ) σ is itself closed.
Variables ᾱ are required to appear in the prefix Q, as specified by the premise ᾱ ⊆ dom(Q). The judgment
(Q) σ ⊏
− σ ′ allows to reveal σ, but no more. In particular, the bounds assigned to ᾱ are shared between σ ′ and
σ, which prevents from revealing more than explicitly specified in σ through implicit instantiation of its free
type variables ᾱ. As a particular case, annotating an expression with ∃ (α) α is useless. Conversely, all inner
bound variables of σ must be matched exactly—up to abstraction.
Syntactic sugar. When σ is closed, we may simply write the annotation σ instead of ∃ (∅) σ. We so recover
the simplified rule given in the introduction (§ 2.3, page 18). In fact, by abuse of notation, we could also write
(a : σ) when σ is not closed to mean (a : ∃ (ftv(σ)) σ), but we prefer to remain more explicit about bound
variables.
We also see abstractions λ(x : σ) a as syntactic sugar for λ(x) let x = (x : σ) in a. Rebinding x to its
annotated version (x : σ) avoids repeating the annotation on each occurrence of x in a. The effect is that
λ(x : σ) a is typed as if it were λ(x) a[(x : σ)/x], but our syntactic sugar is more local. The annotated
abstraction may also be typed directly, with the following derivable typing rule:
Fun⋆

(Q) Γ, x : ρ ⊢ a : τ
ᾱ ⊆ dom(Q)
(Q) Γ ⊢ λ(x : ∃ (ᾱ) ρ) a : ∀(β ⇒ ρ) β → τ
In practice, most uses of annotations are actually in abstractions. The reason not to make annotated abstraction
the primitive form and the annotations the derived form is that annotations are much simpler to deal with,
technically.
Furthermore, for F-like type annotations, (a : ρ) can just be seen as the application of a retyping primitive
function (ρ) to the expression a. In Full MLF, all annotations can be treated as such. We could restrict eMLF
to F-like annotations. However, because types are stratified in Shallow MLF, we would then not reach all type
annotations and eMLF would loose its close correspondence with iMLF.
Example. We first show that the (unannotated) identity function λ(x) x is typable with type ∀(α ⇒ ρ) α → α
for any F-like type scheme ρ, which type would be written ρ → ρ in iMLF. Notice that ρ may be polymorphic.
In the following, we write σid for ∀(α) α → α.
Var

(α ≥ ⊥) x : α ⊢ x : α
(α ≥ ⊥) ∅ ⊢ λ(x) x : α → α
Gen
(∅) ∅ ⊢ λ(x) x : σid
(∅) σid ⊑ ∀(α ⇒ ρ) α → α
Inst
(∅) ∅ ⊢ λ(x) x : ∀(α ⇒ ρ) α → α
Fun

RR n° 6228

36

Rémy & Le Botlan

Notice that a more direct derivation is also possible:
Var

(α ⇒ ρ) x : α ⊢ x : α
(α ⇒ ρ) ∅ ⊢ λ(x) x : α → α
Gen
(∅) ∅ ⊢ λ(x) x : ∀(α ⇒ ρ) α → α
Fun

For comparison, here is a derivation when the argument is annotated.
(α ⇒ ρ) ρ ⊏
−α
(α ⇒ ρ) x : ρ ⊢ x : ρ
(α ⇒ ρ) ρ ⊑ α
Inst
(α ⇒ ρ) x : ρ ⊢ x : α
Fun⋆
(α ⇒ ρ) ∅ ⊢ λ(x : ρ) x : ∀(β ⇒ ρ) β → α
Gen
(∅) ∅ ⊢ λ(x : ρ) x : ∀(α ⇒ ρ) ∀(β ⇒ ρ) β → α
Var

Here, the variable x has a polymorphic F-like type ρ, which is directly accessible with Rule Var. In the previous
derivation, x had only a type α, which was bound to ρ in the prefix, hence not directly available. This is a crucial
difference between the two derivations. Indeed, in the latter derivation, the polymorphism can be instantiated,
so that for example λ(x : σid ) x x is typable. On the contrary, we will show below (§4.3) that λ(x) x x is not
typable when the type annotation is missing. Another important remark is the use of abstraction (and Rule
Inst) to hide the polymorphic type ρ of x as the abstract type α (rigidly bound to ρ in the prefix). This is to
prepare for rule Fun⋆ that requires the codomain of the type of λ(x : ρ) x to be a monotype and not a polytype
ρ.
To see the role of existential quantification in type annotations, compare the two expressions λ(x : ∃ (β) ρ) x
and λ(x : ∀(β) ρ) x where ρ is ∀(α) α → β → α—with a free single type variable β. Their respective types are
∀(β) ∀(γ ⇒ ρ) ∀(γ ′ ⇒ ρ) γ → γ ′ and ∀(γ ⇒ ∀(β) ρ) ∀(γ ′ ⇒ ∀(β) ρ) γ → γ ′ . In the later case, the annotation
requires the argument to be polymorphic in β—hence the result is also polymorphic in β. Conversely, in the
former case, β is shared between the argument type and the result type and cannot be polymorphic within
the expression, but only generalized afterward. Less polymorphism is required on the argument and so less
polymorphism is claimed on the result—namely just as much as promised on the argument.
Derivable rules. Rules App⋆ and UnGen⋆ (defined page 24) remains admissible in eMLF—with types and
type schemes now taken in eMLF, of course.
Recursion. Viewing recursion as a fixed point combinator means that the identifier f of let rec f = λ(x)
a1 in a2 is treated as the argument of a function and must have a ρ type. Then, f needs an annotation if it is
used polymorphically in the body of a1 . This treatment of recursion allows for polymorphic recursion but with
explicit type annotations.
Using a primitive construct for recursion would allow f to be assigned a type scheme instead of a type, via
an explicit annotation. Omitting the annotation would amount to inferring polymorphic recursion, which would
be undecidable in MLF, as it is already undecidable in ML.
Expressiveness
We show that eMLF and iMLF are in close correspondence, and thus exactly as expressive. Dropping type
annotations directly maps eMLF programs to iMLF ones.
Theorem 3 Assume eMLF :: (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ holds. Let a′ be the erasure of a and (Q′ , θ) be TQU. Then,
iMLF :: (Q′ ) θ(Γ) ⊢ a′ : θ(TσU) holds.

(Proof p. 59)

Conversely, all iMLF programs can always be mapped to eMLF ones by inserting explicit type annotations.

Theorem 4 If iMLF :: (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ holds, then there exists a term a′ , such that a is a type-erasure of a′ and
eMLF :: (VQW) VΓW ⊢ a′ : VσW holds.
(Proof p. 60)

Noticeably, the translation of an iMLF program is based on its typing derivation. It introduces a type annotation
on every λ-abstraction, and possibly several ones on type instances and generalizations.
INRIA

Recasting MLF

37

Type soundness
Type soundness is a corollary of Theorem 3, which ensures that eMLF is as safe as iMLF, and Theorem 2, which
states type soundness of iMLF.

4.3

Translating System F into eMLF

The composition of theorems 2 and 4 states that there is a mapping of System-F terms to eMLF terms that
proceeds only by insertion of well-chosen type annotations. Those theorems do not tell us where and what
annotations to insert. However, their proofs are constructive—given a type derivation of the input term, or
equivalently, an explicitly typed input term. That is, we could have used the typed derivation given as input
to explicitly produce a type derivation in eMLF as output.
However, the resulting term would contain many duplicated or scattered type annotations, unless we change
the proof and show stronger (and difficult) lemmas that typed derivations could be rearranged in certain ways,
so that for instance, type annotations can always be moved to function parameters.
Instead, we propose a direct translation of explicitly typed System-F programs to eMLF that keep (actually
translate) the type annotations on λ-abstractions, and throws away all type abstractions and type applications.
Therefore, it returns an eMLF program that contains at most as much, and in general fewer, type information
than the original System-F term.
The first step of the translation is the translation of types. Let us explain an important design choice of
this translation, informally. Rigid bindings are interpreted as substitutions (Definition 4.1.8). For example,
∀(α ⇒ σid ) α → α (1) is interpreted as the F-type σid → σid . However, ∀(α1 ⇒ σid , α2 ⇒ σid ) α1 → α2 (2)
is also interpreted likewise. Therefore, there are two candidates for the converse translation of σid → σid into
eMLF, namely (1) and (2). Observe that (2) is more general than (1) in eMLF (the latter is an instance of the
former). Taking (2) is the approach chosen in § 4.1 to translate iMLF types. Maybe surprisingly, we choose (1)
to be the translation of σid → σid . That is, we always share similar bindings as much as possible, as formalized
in Definition 4.3.3 below. The opposite choice, which would associate (2) to the translation of σid → σid , is
also possible. Although this alternative is perhaps more elegant, its correctness proof is longer and much more
involved (Le Botlan, 2004). We present the first approach here for the sake of simplicity. Despite this choice, this
section remains the most technical part of the paper. It happens that proving the soundness of the translation
from System F to eMLF is subtle and needs meticulous instrumentation. Let us explain why.
A single System-F type, such as σid → σid , corresponds to possibly many types in eMLF, as a result of the
inlining of rigid bindings in System F. Consequently, eMLF types are more discriminatory, i.e. contain more
information, than System-F types, which is crucial for permitting type inference. The downside is that, given
a typing derivation in System F, we have to reconstruct the missing information and show that it is consistent
with eMLF typing rules. The purpose of the instrumentation is exactly to reconstruct and trace this information
in a safe way.
As the rest of the paper does not depend on the technical details of this section, the user may skip them and
directly jump to theorems 6 and 7 at the end of this section.
Auxiliary definitions
We first define a few operators that are used to translate F-types into eMLF-types. The translation introduces
rigid bindings and unconstrained flexible bindings, but never uses constrained flexible bindings.
As a first step, we translate an F-type into a pair of a prefix and a variable used as an entry point into that
prefix. Following our design choice (exposed above), prefixes are maintained in shared form.
Definition 4.3.1 A prefix Q is shared when for all σ, (α1 ⇒ σ) ∈ Q and (α2 ⇒ σ) ∈ Q imply α1 = α2 .
Sharing is purely syntactic, based on type equality. While it would have been more natural to define sharing up
to equivalence, this would require more technical machinery—and at least to present an algorithm for testing
equivalence (as, for instance, the one of Le Botlan (2004)). The syntactic definition suffices and is simpler.
As a result of sharing, the insertion of a new binding into a prefix depends on bindings that are already
present. Insertion, which is defined next, maintains another invariant: prefixes are ordered in the sense that
rigid bindings are inserted as far to the left as possible. For example, the prefix (α, β ⇒ γ → γ) is not ordered
because the rigid bound of β does not depend on α. The ordered, equivalent prefix is (β ⇒γ → γ, α). Intuitively,
ordering may move rigid bindings, but not flexible ones. This is a form of extrusion, which we enforce to ensure
maximal sharing of rigid bounds. Indeed, this maximal sharing requires rigid bindings to have the wider possible
RR n° 6228

38

Rémy & Le Botlan

scope. Formally, the bounds of a prefix Q, written bnds(Q), is the set of all σ such that there exists a binding
(α ⇒ σ) in Q.
Definition 4.3.2 The insertion of a type scheme σ into a prefix Q at variable α, written Q α σ, is a prefix
defined in the two following cases: If (α ⇒ σ)∈ Q, then Q α σ is Q. If α ∈
/ dom(Q) and σ ∈
/ bnds(Q), then
Q α σ is defined recursively as follows:
• ∅ α σ is (α ⇒ σ),
• (Q′′ Q′ ) α σ is (Q′′ α σ)Q′ if ftv(σ) # dom(Q′ ),
• (Q′ , β ′ ⋄ σ ′ ) α σ is (Q′ , β ′ ⋄ σ ′ , α ⇒ σ) if β ′ ∈ ftv(σ).
We write Q α σ for the pair (Q α σ), α.
Notice that insertion is partial. For example, (β ⇒ σ) α σ is undefined. When defined, it returns the original
prefix either exactly or with the binding α = σ inserted “at the right place” while preserving the ordering of
other bindings.
We define an algorithm that computes the translation of an F-type t in two steps. We first define a relation
that takes a prefix Q and the type t as input and returns a pair of a new prefix Q′ that extends Q and a type
variable α as output. This is written (Q) hhtii : (Q′ , α) (read “under prefix Q, a translation of t is the pair
(Q′ , α)”). We then define the translation of t, written hhtii as a set of eMLF types.
The use of an auxiliary relation instead of simply a function is to capture non-determinism that results from
the choice of fresh variables during the translation. Lemma 4.3.6 below shows that a given input yields outputs
that are similar, up to renaming.
Below, we use the notation (Q) hhtii : Q′  σ (without any variable on ) to mean that there exists α such
that Q′ α σ is defined and (Q) hhtii : Q′ α σ holds. This exposes the witness α in the relation (Q) hhtii : (Q′ , α)
and so introduces a source of non-determinism in the definition—the only one.
Definition 4.3.3 The translation relation is the smallest relation on quadruples of the form (Q) hhtii : (Q′ , α)
where Q and Q′ are well-formed shared prefixes and t a type such that ftv(t) ∩ dom(Q′ ) ⊆ dom(Q) satisfying
the following rules:
(Qα) hhtii : (Q1 αQ2 , β)
(Q) hht1 ii : (Q1 , α1 )
(Q1 ) hht2 ii : (Q2 , α2 )
(Q) hhαii : (Q, α)
(Q) hht1 → t2 ii : Q2  α1 → α2
(Q) hh∀(α) tii : Q1  ∀(αQ2 ) β
The restriction on the free type variables of t and the domains of the prefixes can always be satisfied by an
appropriate choice of fresh variables. The only possible translation of a type variable α under prefix Q is the
pair (Q, α), whether α belongs to dom(Q) or not. A translation of an arrow type t1 → t2 under Q is built using
the translation (Q1 , α1 ) of t1 under Q and (Q2 , α2 ) of t2 under Q1 . It is defined as the insertion of α1 → α2
into Q2 . Finally, the translation of a quantified type ∀(α) t is built using the translation of t under Qα. Then,
the resulting prefix is split into Q1 and Q2 and the result is the insertion of ∀(αQ2 ) β into Q1 . Since Q1 αQ2
is ordered, all the bindings of Q2 actually depends on α, possibly indirectly. This means that the prefix Q2 to
appear in the quantification (αQ2 ) is as small as possible.
The inclusion of prefixes, written Q ⊆ Q′ , means that Q′ is obtained from Q by none or several insertions.
When (Q) hhtii : (Q′ , α) holds, we have Q ⊆ Q′ and ftv(Q′ ) ⊆ ftv(Q) ∪ ftv(t). (This easily follows from the
observation that Qα ⊆ Q1 αQ2 implies Q ⊆ Q1 .) Another invariant of the definition is that all bindings that
are in Q′ but not in Q are rigid.
Definition 4.3.4 (Translation of types and prefixes) The translation of an F-type t, written hhtii is the
set of all eMLF type schemes ∀(Q) α such that there exists a rigid, shared prefix Q′ with domain disjoint from
ftv(t) verifying (Q′ ) hhtii : (Q, α). The translation of an F-typing environment A, written hhAii, is the set of
typing environments Γ that maps each x in dom(A) to some type scheme in hhA(x)ii.
The prefix Q must actually be rigid and shared. This follows from definition of the translation relation and the
fact that Q′ is itself rigid.
Note that σid is both a type of System F and of eMLF. We have (∅) hhσid ii : (β ⇒ σid ), β. We then have
(β ⇒ σid ) hhσid → σid ii : (β ⇒ σid ) (γ ⇒ β → β), γ.
We shall see below that all type schemes in the translation of an F-type are in fact equivalent (Corollary 4.3.10), and similarly for the translation of typing environments. We call rigid an eMLF type scheme that
is in the translation of an F-type.
INRIA

Recasting MLF

39

Auxiliary results. We now establish several properties about the translation algorithm that will be used
to prove the main result of this section, Lemma 5, from which theorems 6 and 7—two variants of the same
result—immediately follow. All of these properties address the following informal question: How can the output
vary for some small changes to the input? For instance, the following lemmas answer this question in particular
cases:
◦ Lemma 4.3.5 states that inputs and outputs can be consistently renamed.
◦ Lemma 4.3.6 characterizes non determinism: the outputs can be renamed while leaving the input unchanged provided that some capture-avoiding side conditions hold.
◦ Lemma 4.3.7 states a form of idempotence: i) the input may be replaced by the output (leaving the output
unchanged); ii) once the input and output are equal, they may be extended simultaneously.
◦ Lemma 4.3.9 states that the relation is closed by equivalence.
◦ Lemma 4.3.12 characterizes the effect of applying a substitution to the input type: the output prefix must
be substituted and shared again—along a sharing relation defined below.
◦ Lemma 4.3.13 states that when removing an unconstrained binding from the input, the bindings of the
output may have to be reordered.
As mentioned above, given a prefix Q and a type t, the algorithm may return different results due to different
choices of fresh variables. This is captured by saying that renamings preserve the translation.
Lemma 4.3.5 (Stability by renaming) If (Q) hhtii : (Q′ , α) holds, then (φ(Q)) hhφ(t)ii : (φ(Q′ ), φ(α)) holds
for any renaming φ.
Conversely, the choice of fresh variables is the only source of non-determinism, so that outputs for a single input
are always equal up to renaming. Additionally, the renaming can be chosen to be invariant on any “fresh” set
of variables I.
Lemma 4.3.6 (Determinism up to α-conversion) If (Q) hhtii : (Q1 , α1 ) and (Q) hhtii : (Q′1 , α′1 ), then for
all finite set I disjoint from dom(Q1 ) ∪ dom(Q′1 ), there exists a renaming φ such that
dom(φ) # dom(Q) ∪ ftv(t) ∪ I

φ(Q1 ) = Q′1

φ(α1 ) = α′1

As a consequence, ∀(Q1 ) α1 is equal to ∀(Q′1 ) α′1 by α-conversion. The translation is also stable by iteration:
translating a type under a prefix already containing the bindings of the translation returns the same prefix.
Lemma 4.3.7 (Idempotence) If (∅) hhtii : (Q, α), then (QQ′ ) hhtii : (QQ′ , α) for any Q′ such that QQ′ is
well-formed.
(Proof p. 60)

The insertion of a type σ in a prefix Q (that is, Q  σ) is defined so as to maximize sharing. The result depends
on the initial prefix Q. Therefore, the translation of a type t under Q (that is, (Q) hhtii) also depends on Q. We
wish to show that the translation of a single type under different initial prefixes yields comparable prefixes, up
to some equivalence relation that we define now.
The equivalence relation on shared prefixes ≡I is the smallest equivalence (reflexive, symmetric, and transitive) relation also satisfying the two following rules:
eSha-Free

eSha-Comm

α∈
/ I ∪ dom(Q) ∪ ftv(Q)
I

Q ≡ (Q, α ⇒ σ)

σ∈
/ bnds(Q)

α1 ∈
/ ftv(σ2 )
′

I

α2 ∈
/ ftv(σ1 )

(Q, α1 ⇒ σ1 , α2 ⇒ σ2 , Q ) ≡ (Q, α2 ⇒ σ2 , α1 ⇒ σ1 , Q′ )

The superscript I is a finite set of type variables called the interface. Bindings of variables in I are “exposed”
to equivalence. Rule eSha-Free allows the insertion (or removal) of bindings not in the interface I. Side
conditions ensure that the prefix is kept well-formed and shared. Rule eSha-Comm allows the commutation of
independent binders.
Unsurprisingly, two types built with equivalent prefixes are equivalent.
Lemma 4.3.8 If Q1 ≡I Q2 and ftv(σ) ⊆ I, then (Q) ∀(Q1 ) σ ≡ ∀(Q2 ) σ holds under any suitable Q.

RR n° 6228

40

Rémy & Le Botlan

Figure 14: Translation of types and prefixes
eTsh-Flex

eTsh-Types
eTsh-Empty

−
>φ Q2
(Q) Q1 −
−
−
> ∀(Q2 ) φ(τ )
(Q) ∀(Q1 ) τ −

−
>id ∅
(Q) ∅ −

−
>φ Q2
(Qα) Q1 −
−
−
>φ αQ2
(Q) αQ1 −

eTsh-Subst

−
> σ′
(Q) σ −
−

−
>φ Q2
(α′ ⇒ σ ′ ) ∈ Q
(Q) Q1 [α′ /α] −
−
−
>φ◦[α′ /α] Q2
(Q) (α ⇒ σ, Q1 ) −

eTsh-Context

−
>φ Q2
−
> σ′
σ′ ∈
/ bnds(Q)
(Q, α ⇒ σ ′ ) Q1 −
(Q) σ −
′
−
−
>φ (α ⇒ σ , Q2 )
(Q) (α ⇒ σ, Q1 ) −

Equivalent prefixes also yield equivalent translations. Informally, this may be illustrated by the commutative
diagram below. The translation of t under two equivalent prefixes Q1 and Q2 , yields equivalent prefixes Q′1 and
Q′2 .
≡
Q1
Q2
(Q1 )hhtii
Q′1

(Q2 )hhtii
≡

Q′2

Lemma 4.3.9 (Equiv) Let I be ftv(t). We assume that Q1 is rigid and Q1 ≡I Q2 holds. If (Q1 ) hhtii : (Q′1 , α1 )
and (Q2 ) hhtii : (Q′2 , α2 ) hold, then there exist a set J and a renaming φ such that:
dom(φ) # I

I ∪ {α1 } ⊆ J

Q′1 ≡J φ(Q′2 )

Corollary 4.3.10 If σ1 , σ2 ∈ hhtii, then (Q) σ1 ≡ σ2 under any suitable Q.

φ(α2 ) = α1
(Proof p. 61)

(Proof p. 64)

We now consider the effect of type instance on the translation. More precisely, substituting α by t′ in a
type t has an effect on sharing, in the sense that the translation of t[t′ /α] is not only a substitution of the
translation of t. For example, consider the type t equal to (σid → α) → (σid → σid ). A valid translation of t
under an empty prefix is (after harmless simplification) ∀(α1 ⇒ σid , α2 ⇒ α1 → α, α3 ⇒ α1 → α1 ) α2 → α3 (1).
Substituting α by σid in t, we get t[σid /α], that is, (σid → σid ) → (σid → σid ). A valid translation of the latter is
∀(α1 ⇒ σid , α2 ⇒ α1 → α1 ) α2 → α2 (2). We see that α2 and α3 have been merged. In order to transform (1)
into (2), the substitution [α1 /α] must be applied first, then similar bindings must be shared again (namely, α2
and α3 ).
−
>φ that shares prefixes as much as possible. The subscript φ is a
To this end, we define an algorithm −
−
substitution that keeps track of sharing that has already been performed. In the example above, φ would be
−
> is recursively defined as a set of (deterministic) inference rules given in Figure 14.
[α2 /α3 ]. The algorithm −
−
−
> σ2 for types, where Q and σ1 are inputs and σ2 in an output (Rule eTshThe algorithm is written (Q) σ1 −
−
−
>φ Q2 for prefixes, where Q and Q1 are inputs and φ and Q2 are outputs.
Types). It is written (Q) Q1 −
−
−
> σ2 when it is empty. Rules eTsh−
>φ Q2 or (Q) σ1 −
As usual, the prefix Q may be omitted in (Q) Q1 −
−
−
Empty, eTsh-Flex, and eTsh-Context are context rules that do not perform any sharing. On the contrary,
Rule eTsh-Subst detects and shares two similar bindings.
The next lemma describes properties of this algorithm.
Lemma 4.3.11
−
>φ Q2 , then dom(φ) = dom= (Q1 ) − dom(Q2 ) and dom(Q1 ) = dom(Q2 ) ∪ dom(φ).
i) If (Q) Q1 −
−
−
>φ Q2 holds, then for any type σ closed under QQ1 , we have (Q) ∀(Q1 ) σ ⊏
− ∀(Q2 ) φ(σ).
ii) If (Q) Q1 −
−
Item i) is a technical invariant: the domain of Q1 is the disjoint sum of the domain of Q2 and the domain of φ.
More precisely, the domain of φ is included in the rigid domain of Q1 (which means that only rigid bindings are

INRIA

Recasting MLF

41

shared). Item ii) asserts that the sharing performed by the algorithm corresponds to abstraction at the type
level.
(Proof p. 64)

The following lemma, composed of three properties, specifies the effect of a substitution ψ of the form [α/β]
over a translation hhtii. Property P-i is used in the proof of the following commutative diagram (Property P-ii):
−
>
ψ(Q1 ) −
−
Q1
Q2
hhtii
Q′1

hhψ(t)ii
−
>
ψ(Q′1 ) −

Q′2

Moreover, the effect of ψ on the translation is equivalent to the substitution [t′ /β], provided (Q′ , α) is a
translation of t′ (Property P-iii).
Lemma 4.3.12 Let ψ be the substitution [α/β]. We assume that the α is bound in Q. We say that Q is α-rigid
if Q is rigid or of the form Q′ , α ⋄ σ, Q′′ with Q′ rigid. The following implications hold:
P-i

ψ(Q) −
−
>φ Q′

β 6= α′
Q is α-rigid
β∈
/ dom(Q)
Q α′ σ is defined
φ ◦ ψ(σ) −
−
> σ′
−
>φ′ ◦φ Q′ φ′ ◦φ(α′ ) σ ′
dom(φ′ ) ⊆ {α′ }
∃φ′ such that ψ(Q α′ σ) −
−

P-ii

Q1 is α1 -rigid

Q1 shared
β∈
/ dom(Q′1 )
ftv(t) # dom= (Q′1 )
(Q1 ) hhtii : (Q′1 , α1 )
′
′
′
−
>φ′ ◦φ Q′2
∃Q2 , α2 , φ s.t. (Q2 ) hhψ(t)ii : (Q2 , α2 )
ψ(Q′1 ) −
′
φ ◦ φ ◦ ψ(α1 ) = α2

−
>φ Q2
ψ(Q1 ) −
−

P-iii

(∅) hht′ ii : (Q′ , α)
(Q′ ) hhψ(t)ii : (Q′2 , α2 )
(Q′ ) hht[t′ /β]ii : (Q′2 , α2 )

(Proof p. 64)

In the following lemma, we show that an unconstrained binding (here β) may be removed from the input prefix
of the translation and only requires some reordering of binders in the output. To this end, we define the relation
≈ as the smallest equivalence relation on prefixes satisfying eSha-Comm. Noticeably, Q ≈ Q′ implies Q ≡I Q′
for any I.
Lemma 4.3.13 Let Q1 and Q2 be rigid prefixes. Let P and P ′ be two prefixes, each of which is either empty
or starts with an unconstrained binding. Then, the following implication holds:
(Q1 βQ2 P ) hhtii : (Q′1 βQ′2 P ′ , α)
∃Q′3
(Q3 P ) hhtii : (Q′3 P ′ , α)

∧

Q1 Q2 ≈ Q3
Q′1 Q′2 ≈ Q′3

(Proof p. 65)

We are finally equipped to show the correctness of the translation from System F into MLF. We shall use
the two following derivable rules as short-cuts in the proof.
Lemma 4.3.14 The following rules are derivable:
Shift⋆

Q′ rigid
′
(QQ ) ∀(Q′ ) σ ⊏
−σ

Share⋆

(QQ′ ) ∀(Q′ ) τ ⊑ τ

Theorem 5 If F :: Γ′ ⊢ a : t holds, then there exists an expression a′ with type erasure a and such that
eMLF :: (Q) Γ ⊢ a′ : σ holds for any Γ ∈ hhΓ′ ii, σ ∈ hhtii and suitable prefix Q.

(Proof p. 66)

The main result follows as a corollary.
Theorem 6 Any term typable in implicit System F is typable in MLF by adding some type annotations on
function arguments.

RR n° 6228

42

Rémy & Le Botlan

Noticing that type annotations on function arguments depend only on the type of the argument, and not on
the rest of the typing derivation, a more precise statement is the following:
Theorem 7 Any term typable in explicit System F is typable in MLF by dropping type abstractions and type
applications and by translating type annotations.
Remarkably, all the System-F terms that differ only in their type abstractions and type applications are translated towards the same eMLF program. Since every eMLF program admits a principal type (this result is not
shown in this paper, but has been shown for Full MLF as well as a small variant of eMLF by Le Botlan (2004)),
this type captures all the possible type abstractions and type applications of the term.
While the encoding of System F terms into eMLF uses an annotation on every λ-abstraction, these annotations
could in fact be omitted when the argument is not used polymorphically, as shown below by the embedding of
ML into eMLF.

4.4

Embedding ML into eMLF

We show that eMLF is a conservative extension to ML. That is, we consider ML raw terms. i.e. eMLF terms that
do not use type annotations, and show that well-typedness in ML implies well-typedness in eMLF. Conversely,
closed ML raw terms that are well-typed in eMLF are also well-typed in ML.
ML types are a subset of F-types where quantification is allowed only at the outermost level.
The instance relation for ≤ML has been defined in the introduction (§2.1, page 12). We recall that it is
composed of exactly all pairs of the form ∀(ᾱ) σ ≤ML ∀(β̄) σ[τ̄ /ᾱ]) with β̄ # ftv(∀(ᾱ) σ). Notice that variables
ᾱ may only be substituted by monotypes τ̄ . The following chain of relations in eMLF shows that ≤ML is a
subrelation of ⊑.
∀(ᾱ) σ

=
=
≡
⊑
⊑
≡
=

∀(α1 , .., αn ) σ
∀(α1 ≥ ⊥, .., αn ≥ ⊥) σ
∀(β̄) ∀(α1 ≥ ⊥, .., αn ≥ ⊥) σ
∀(β̄) ∀(α1 ≥ τ1 , .., αn ≥ τn ) σ
∀(β̄) ∀(α1 ⇒ τ1 , .., αn ⇒ τn ) σ
∀(β̄) σ[τ1 /α1 ]..[τn /αn ]
∀(β̄) σ[τ̄ /ᾱ]

by notation
by notation
by eEqu-Free
by eIns-Bot and context rule
by eIns-Rigid
by eEqu-Mono
by notation

ML terms are in eMLF. The typing rules of ML are exactly those of eMLF, namely Var, Fun, App, Inst,
Gen, Let without Annot, and of course, modulo the restriction to ML types and prefixes and the use of ≤ML
instead of ⊑ in rule Inst. Consequently, any typing derivation in ML is also a typing derivation in eMLF (which
is not a derivation of the most principal type in eMLF, in general).
Theorem 8 Any term typable in ML is also typable in eMLF.
Conversely, terms that are typable in eMLF are not necessarily typable in ML. Indeed, eMLF contains the full
power of System F, but ML does not. However, given an unannotated term of eMLF, it does also typecheck in
ML.
Unannotated eMLF terms are in ML We prove this by translating eMLF typing derivations of unannotated
terms into ML typing derivations in two steps. First, rigid bindings are removed from the initial derivation by
“flexifying” the derivation (Definition 4.4.1). The result which contains only flexible types, is still a valid
derivation (Lemma 4.4.3). Last, all quantifiers are extruded to the outermost level. The final derivation is still
correct and it is a derivation in ML (Lemma 4.4.7).
Definition 4.4.1 eMLF types that do not contain rigid bindings are said to be flexible. We say that a derivation
is flexible if it does not contain any rigid binding in any type nor in any prefix appearing in the derivation. A
judgment is flexible if it has a flexible derivation.
Let flex be the function defined on eMLF types and prefixes that transforms every rigid binding into a flexible
binding. For instance, flex (∀(α ⇒ σ1 , β ≥ σ2 ) σ) is ∀(α ≥ flex (σ1 ), β ≥ flex (σ2 )) flex (σ). The following lemma
shows that flexifying an instance relation is indeed correct.
INRIA

Recasting MLF

43

Lemma 4.4.2
i) If (Q) σ1 ≡ σ2 , then (flex (Q)) flex (σ1 ) ≡ flex (σ2 ) is flexible.
ii) If (Q) σ1 ⊏
− σ2 , then (flex (Q)) flex (σ1 ) ⊑ flex (σ2 ) is flexible.
iii) If (Q) σ1 ⊑ σ2 , then (flex (Q)) flex (σ1 ) ⊑ flex (σ2 ) is flexible.

(Proof p. 67)

We lift the function flex to typing environments and to typing judgments in the natural way. This operation
preserves typing judgments.
Lemma 4.4.3 For any unannotated term a, if (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ holds in eMLF, then so does flex ((Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ).

(Proof p. 67)

We recall a standard result of ML.
Lemma 4.4.4 If we have ∀(ᾱ) τ1 ≤ML ∀(β̄) τ2 , then for any σ such that ftv(σ) # ᾱ ∪ β̄, we have ∀(ᾱ)
σ[τ1 /γ] ≤ML ∀(β̄) σ[τ2 /γ]
We now show how a flexible eMLF type is transformed into an ML type by extrusion of quantifiers. We
first transform prefixes. A flexible prefix is transformed into the pair of a set of quantifiers and a monotype
substitution.
Definition 4.4.5 The ML approximation of a flexible prefix Q, written hhQii, and the ML approximation of a
flexible type σ, written hhσii, are defined recursively as follows (we overload the notation used for System F,
which should not raise any ambiguity):
hh∅ii = (∅, id)

hhQii = (ᾱ, θ)
hhσii = ∀(β̄) τ
ᾱ # β̄
hhQ, α ≥ σii = (ᾱβ̄, θ ◦ [τ /α])

hh⊥ii = ∀(α) α

hhQii = (ᾱ, θ)
hh∀(Q) τ ii = ∀(ᾱ) θ(τ )

Notice that the ML approximation of a prefix Q is a pair (ᾱ, θ) that may be renamed. For example, the
approximation of (α ≥ σid ) is (β, [β → β/α]) which is considered equivalent to the pair (γ, [γ → γ/α]). As a
consequence, we may always assume freshness conditions on the new variables introduced by the approximation.
We omit the details.
Lemma 4.4.6
i) For any σ and any monotype substitution θ, we have hhθ(σ)ii = θ(hhσii).
ii) If (Q) σ1 ⊑ σ2 is flexible, and hhQii = (ᾱ, θ), then θ(hhσ1 ii) ≤ML θ(hhσ2 ii) holds.

(Proof p. 67)

We lift hh·ii to typing environments in the obvious way.
Lemma 4.4.7 If there exists a flexible derivation of (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ in eMLF then there exists a derivation of
(ᾱ) θ(hhΓii) ⊢ a : θ(hhσii) in ML where (ᾱ, θ) is hhQii.

(Proof p. 68)

Theorem 9 Any unannotated term typable in eMLF under a flexible typing environment Γ (including an empty
one) is typable in ML under hhΓii.
(Proof p. 68)

This shows why terms that are insufficiently annotated are rejected. For example, ω is not typable in eMLF, as
we claimed earlier. By contrast, the annotated version ω † is, as explained on page 35.
Thus, although the full power of System F is available in eMLF, it must be gently introduced by means
of explicit type annotations. Few type annotations are needed (the encoding of System F is already concise
and still sometimes redundant), but some are mandatory: annotations on function arguments that are used
polymorphically. This provides a clear intuition to the programmer with respect to when to put type annotations.
Rather than a weakness, it is the strength of eMLF to enforce such annotations. Since such a clear difference
can be made between implicit and explicit polymorphism and programs rejected accordingly, type inference
never has to guess polymorphism and, as a result, is decidable (and tractable).
Although our guideline to put annotations on function arguments that are used polymorphically is intuitive
and accurate, based on our experience, it lacks a formal definition. Unfortunately, it is difficult to find an exact
characterization that does not paraphrase the typing rules of eMLF, since typechecking an expression λ(x) a
may combine all the expressive features of MLF while typechecking its body a.
Interestingly, there are approximations of this criteria based on the translation of System F into iMLF and
thus restricted to programs that are typable in System F. Of course, such criteria are only meaningful if we
restrict to type annotations on parameters of abstractions, that is, if we replace rules Fun and Annot by Fun⋆ .
RR n° 6228

44

Rémy & Le Botlan

Unsurprisingly, if λ(x : t) a is typable in System F and t is a monotype, then λ(x) a is typable in MLF without
an annotation on x. This implies, for example, that (λ(x) x) ω † needs no annotation on x.
This simple criterion is weak, but can be combined with type preserving transformations in MLF to show
that more involved programs, such as λ(x) choose ω † x, need no annotation either—without explicitly referring
to the typing rules of MLF, but to those of System-F.

4.5

Type-preserving program transformations

In a type-inference system, it is important that type inference does not interfere with the programming style.
Therefore, programs must be stable under some small local transformations, such as the permutation of the
order of arguments, the introduction of auxiliary bindings, etc. Such common transformations should therefore
be type preserving. We list a few useful type-preserving transformations below and use them to better explain
how functions can require some of their parameters to be polymorphic but still use them parametrically, in
which case an annotation is not required in eMLF.
We write a ⊆ a′ to mean that all typings of a are typings of a′ , that is, for all prefix Q, for all typing context
Γ and all type τ , the judgment (Q) Γ ⊢ a : τ implies (Q) Γ ⊢ a′ : τ .
Invariance of typings by let-conversion. The invariance of typings by let-conversion is a particular case
of subject reduction—for a liberal reduction strategy that allows reduction of non-evaluated expressions. We
have let x = a1 in a2 ⊆ a2 [a1 /x]. The proof of this property in MLF is the same as in ML.
The converse property, a2 [a1 /x] ⊆ let x = a1 in a2 also holds in MLF, whenever x appears free in a2 . In
eMLF, this result easily follows from the existence of principal types, which is however not shown in this paper.
Principal types allow to factor out the types of the different occurrences of a1 in a2 [a1 /x] as several instantiations
of the principal type of a1 . This property also holds in ML and in church-style System F, both of which have
principal types—by design in church-style System F since typing derivations are unique. However, this property
does not hold in all systems with principal types (Leijen, 2009, 2008; Vytiniotis et al., 2008).
Preservation of typings by β-reduction. Although, we do not prove subject reduction for eMLF in this
paper, it has been proved in the case of Full eMLF in (Le Botlan and Rémy, 2003; Le Botlan, 2004), provided
new type annotations may be introduced during reduction—but only to replace existing type annotations. For
instance, no propagation of annotations is necessary for applications of unannotated abstractions, and we have
(λ(x) a) a′ ⊆ a[a′ /x]11 . In particular, if (λ(x′ ) λ(x) a) a′ needs no annotations on x and x′ , then λ(x) (a[a′ /x′ ])
needs no annotation on x.
Invariance of typings by abstraction of applications. Typing of applications is “first class” in eMLF, in
the sense that the primitive application of a1 a2 can be redefined as the application of apply to arguments a1
and a2 , where apply is the abstraction of the application λ(x) λ(y) x y. Formally, we have a1 a2 ⊆ apply a1 a2 ,
and conversely, apply a1 a2 ⊆ a1 a2 .
Proof: The inverse inclusion follows from the preservation of typings by β-reduction. We thus only need to check
the direct inclusion. Assume (Q) Γ ⊢ a1 a2 : τ , a derivation of this judgment will end with a sequence (1) of rules
Inst and Gen eventually preceded by a rule App of the form:
App

(QQ′ ) Γ ⊢ a1 : τ2 → τ1 (2)

(QQ′ ) Γ ⊢ a2 : τ2 (3)

′

(QQ ) Γ ⊢ a1 a2 : τ1
We can build the following derivation (where anchors must be replaced by the premises introduced above):
App

(QQ′ ) Γ ⊢ apply : (τ2 → τ1 ) → τ2 → τ1
App

(2)

(QQ′ ) Γ ⊢ apply a1 : τ2 → τ1

(3)

′

(QQ ) Γ ⊢ apply a1 a2 : τ1

which, when followed by the sequence (1), ends with (Q) Γ ⊢ apply a1 a2 : τ .

As the order of arguments is insignificant in eMLF, we also have a1 a2 ⊆ revapply a1 a2 , and conversely, where
revapply stands for the application receiving its argument in reverse order λ(x) λ(y) y x.
11 Formally, this result has only been shown in Full eMLF for closed expressions.

INRIA

Recasting MLF

45

Preservation of typings by η-expansion. Of course, this may only hold for functional expressions. Formally, if (Q) Γ ⊢ a : ∀(Q′ ) τ → τ ′ and x is not free in a, then (Q) Γ ⊢ λ(x) a x : ∀(Q′ ) τ → τ ′ .
Proof: We may first show the lemma for monotypes, i.e. when Q′ is empty. Assume (Q) Γ ⊢ a : τ → τ ′ and
x is not free in a. By weakening (a standard property that could be shown by induction on the height of the
derivation), we have (Q) Γ, x : τ ⊢ a : τ → τ ′ (1). We thus have the following typing derivation:
Fun
App

(1)

(Q) Γ, x : τ ⊢ x : τ

(Q) Γ, x : τ ⊢ a x : τ ′
(Q) Γ ⊢ λ(x) a x : τ → τ ′

The general case reduces to the monotype case, by applying a sequence of rules UnGen⋆ beforehand and a sequence
of rules Gen afterward.

Parametric uses of polymorphism. Our guideline for eMLF annotate only parameters of functions that are
used polymorphically can also be explained by its corollary: parameters of functions that are used monomorphically need not be annotated. These include parameters of function that are monomorphic, as we have seen above
with, for example, x in (λ(x) x) ω † , but also parameters with polymorphic types that are used parametrically
in the body of the function, such as x in expressions λ(x) x ω † , λ(x) ω † x, or λ(x) choose ω † x. Any typing in
System F of these expressions will require a polymorphic type for x.
Still, we can show that x is used parametrically by exhibiting in each case a type preserving transformations
in which x can be typed monomorphically.
For example, λ(x) choose ω † x is the reduct of (λ(y) λ(x) choose y x) ω † where both x and y are
monomorphic—as can easily be seen on a typing derivation in System F—and thus needs no annotation. Thus,
by the subject reduction property, x needs no annotation in the original term.
Similarly, λ(x) x ω † is the reduct of (λ(y) λ(x) x y) ω † , where again x may be assigned a monomorphic type
in System F. For λ(x) ω † x, one need not even refer to the typing in System F, as it is also the η-expansion of
ω † and is thus typable in eMLF, since ω † is.
By contrast λ(x) x x cannot be typed without an annotation on x. Indeed, all types of this expression in
System F must assign x a type of the form ∀(α) t where α occurs on the leftmost part of t. In this example, x is
explicitly used at two incompatible types. However, x may also be indirectly required to be polymorphic, as in
λ(x) let y = x in y y. This programs becomes λ(x) (λ(y) y y) x after let-expansion, which, as we already know,
need an annotation, e.g. σid on y in MLF. This annotation is transferred during β-reduction to the annotation
σid on x in the resulting term. So it is unsurprising that the original program λ(x) let y = x in y y also need an
annotation, e.g. σid , on its parameter x.
We have identified some typical parametric uses of polymorphic parameters for which no annotations are
required and, conversely, some polymorphic uses of parameters that require type annotations. Interestingly, we
could easily classify these examples without directly referring to the typing rules of eMLF.
There are also examples that combine several features of MLF in sequence, for which typechecking is harder—
but still possible—to predict. Consider the expression λ(x) let y = ω † x in y y (1). We may abstract ω † away
in (λ(z) λ(x) let y = z x in y y) ω † . The expression (λ(z) λ(x) let y = z x in y y) is not typable in ML and thus
z or x need a type annotation, but we cannot tell whether both of them need one. It happens that a single
annotation ∃ (α) α → σid on z that specifies the codomain of z is sufficient. Then, x needs not an annotation.
We can explain this on the original form as follows: in the type of ω † the domain and the codomain share no
type variable, hence the type of ω † x does not depend on the type of x (as long as ω † x is typable), and can
therefore be generalized in y and instantiated independently for the two occurrences of y in y y. Thus, the
expression (1) is typable in MLF.

5

Related works

Our work continues a long line of research efforts concerned with type inference with first-class polymorphism.
Unsurprisingly, this problem has been tackled from two opposite directions, either performing (partial) type
inference for (variants of) System F and attempting to reach most of ML programs (§5.1), or encapsulating
first-class polymorphic values within first-order ML types (§5.2) in more and more transparent ways.

RR n° 6228

46

5.1

Rémy & Le Botlan

Type inference for System F

Several interesting works on type inference for System-F-like type systems had already been carried out before
it was proved to be undecidable for System F (Wells, 1999) and for some of its variants.
Type containment. In the late 80’s, Mitchell noticed that System F might not be the “right” system for
studying type inference (Mitchell, 1988). He introduced the closure of System F by η-conversion, known as
Fη , and showed that well-typedness in Fη could be obtained by replacing the instance relation ≤F by a larger
relation ≤η , called type containment (see §2.1). He also showed that uses of type-containment were equivalent
to the applications of retyping functions—functions whose type-erasure η-reduces to the identity—in System F.
Type inference for System F modulo η-expansion is now known to be also undecidable (Wells, 1996).
Our treatment of type annotations as type-revealing primitives resembles the use of retyping functions.
Moreover, ≤η and our type instance relation ≤ have a few interesting cases in common. However, they also
differ significantly. Type containment is implicit, automatically driven by the type structure, and propagated
according to polarities of occurrences (e.g. contravariantly on the left-hand side of arrows and covariantly
anywhere else). By contrast, our form of type instantiation is always explicitly specified via flexibly bound
variables, and may be used at occurrences of arbitrary polarities and in particular, it can be applied simultaneously at occurrences of opposite polarities, so that the weaker the argument, the weaker the result. Of course,
typing rules only allow type instantiation at some occurrences and prevent it via rigid bindings anywhere else.
As a result, the two relations are incomparable. The resemblance between type containment and MLF is only
superficial.
Polymorphic Subtyping. System F<: is another extension of System F with a richer instance relation <:
(see its definition in §2.1). In F<: as in MLF, each type variable is also given a bound. However, it is an upper
bound in F<: while it is a lower bound in MLF. As for type-containment, the subtyping relation <: is structural,
which makes a huge difference with our instance relation. Type inference for F<: is undecidable. Even type
checking is undecidable for some variants of the subtyping relation <: (Pierce, 1994).
Type inference based on second-order unification. Second-order unification, although known to be undecidable, has been used to explore the practical effectiveness of type inference for System F by Pfenning (Pfenning, 1988). Despite our opposite choice, that is not to support second-order unification, there are at least two
comparisons to be made. Firstly, Pfenning’s work does not cover the language ML per se, but only the λ-calculus,
since let-bindings are expanded prior to type inference. Indeed, ML is not the simply-typed λ-calculus and type
inference in ML cannot, in practice, be reduced to type inference in the simply-typed λ-calculus after expansion
of let-bindings. Secondly, one proposal seems to require annotations exactly where the other can skip them:
Pfenning’s system requires place holders (without type information) for type abstractions and type applications
but never need type information on arguments of functions. Conversely, MLF requires type information on some
arguments of functions, but no information for type abstractions or applications.
While Pfenning’s system relies on second-order unification to really infer polymorphic types, we strictly
keep a first-order unification mechanism and never infer polymorphic types—we just propagate them. It might
be interesting to see whether our form of unification could be understood as a particular case of second-order
unification. For instance, using a constraint-based presentation of second-order unification (Dowek et al., 1996),
could flexible bounds help capture certain multi-sets of unification constraints in a more principal manner, and
so reduce the amount of backtracking?
Another restriction of second-order unification is unification under a mixed prefix (Miller, 1992). However,
our notion of prefix and its role in abstracting polytypes is quite different. In particular, mixed prefixes mention
universal and existential quantification, whereas MLF prefixes are universally quantified. Besides, MLF prefixes
associate a bound to each variable, whereas mixed prefixes are always unconstrained.
Partial type inference in System F. Several people have considered partial type inference for System F (Boehm,
1985; Pfenning, 1993; Schubert, 1998) and stated undecidability results for some particular variants. For
instance, Boehm (Boehm, 1985) and Pfenning (Pfenning, 1993) considered programs of System F where λabstractions can be unannotated, and only the locations of type applications were given, not the actual type
argument. They both showed that type reconstruction then becomes undecidable as it can encode second-order
unification problems. The encoding introduces an unannotated λ-abstraction the parameter of which is used

INRIA

Recasting MLF

47

polymorphically. This is precisely what we avoid in MLF: all polymorphic λ-abstraction must be annotated,
whereas type abstractions and type applications are inferred.
As another example, Schubert (Schubert, 1998) considers sequent decision problems for System F in both
Curry style and Church style. They, in fact, correspond to type inference problems in System F, as already
studied by Wells (Wells, 1999), and are known to be undecidable. An inverse typing problem in Church-style
System F consists in finding the typing environment Γ that makes a fully annotated program M typable.
Schubert proves that this problem is undecidable in general by encoding a restricted form of second-order
unification, which is then proved equivalent to the problem of termination for two-counter automatons. We see,
that although the program is fully annotated, the knowledge of the typing environment is necessary to typecheck
it in a decidable way. It is then unsurprising that systems with intersection types, and more generally systems
aiming at principal typings, which have to infer both the type and the typing environment, are undecidable.
On the contrary, the typing context is always known in the approach followed in MLF—-as in ML.
Decidable fragments of System F. Several approaches have considered fragments of System F, for which
complete type reconstruction may be performed: Rank-2 polymorphic types (Kfoury and Wells, 1994), called
Λ2 , and rank-2 intersection types (Jim, 1995), called I2 actually type the same programs. They have been
generalized to even-rank polymorphic types and odd-rank intersection types (Jim, 2000). However, none of
these system is compositional, because of the rank limitation: one may not abstract over arbitrary values of the
language. Since first-class polymorphism is precisely needed to introduce a higher level of abstraction, we think
this is a fundamental limitation that is not acceptable in practice. Besides, their type inference algorithm in Λ2
requires rewriting programs according to some non-intuitive set of reduction rules. Hence, no simple intuitive
specification of well-typedness is provided to the user. Worse, type inference can only be performed on full
programs: it is thus not possible to split a program into several modules and typecheck them independently.
Noticeably, I2 has better properties than Λ2 , such as principal typings. However, the equivalence between I2
and Λ2 is shown by means of rewriting techniques; thus, although a typing in I2 can be inferred in a modular
way, it does not give a modular typing in Λ2 .
Intersection types and System E. Wells and Carlier have proposed a type system, called System E, that
generalizes intersection types with expansion variables (Carlier et al., 2004). Although their work is quite
different in nature, as type inference is undecidable and only a semi-algorithm is given, there are interesting
connections to be made. In particular, both works attempt to share several derivations of a same term, using
implicit sharing via expansion variables in the case of System E or more explicit sharing via auxiliary quantifiers
in the case of MLF.
Local type inference. Local type inference (Cardelli, 1993; Pierce and Turner, 2000) uses typing constraints
between adjacent nodes to propagate type information locally, as opposed to the global propagation that is
performed by unification as used in MLF (or ML). This technique is quite successful at leaving implicit many
(but not all) eliminations of both subtyping and universal polymorphism. However, it usually performs poorly
for their introduction forms, which remain mandatory in most cases. The technique has been tested in practice
and ambiguous results were reported: While many dummy type annotations can be removed, a few of them
remained necessary and sometimes in rather unpredictable ways. One difficulty arises from anonymous functions
as well as so-called hard-to-synthesize arguments (Hosoya and Pierce, 1999).
The technique is actually fragile and does not resist to simple program transformations. As an example,
the application app f x may be untypable with local type inference when f is polymorphic12 . Principal types
are ensured by finding a “best argument” each time a polymorphic type is instantiated. If no best argument
can be found, the typechecker signals an error. Such errors do not exist in ML nor MLF, where every typable
expression has a principal type.
It should be noticed that finding a “best argument”, and thus inferring principal types in local type systems
is sometimes made more difficult because of the presence of subtyping, which MLF does not consider. In
particular, to our knowledge, local type inference and its refinement described in the next paragraph are still
the only partial type inference techniques that deal with both second-order polymorphism and subtyping. The
extension of MLF with subtyping has not been explored at all.
12 The problem disappears in the uncurrified form, but uncurrifying is not always possible, or it may amount to introducing
anonymous functions with an explicit type annotation.

RR n° 6228

48

Rémy & Le Botlan

Colored local type inference (Odersky et al., 2001) is considered as an improvement over local type inference,
although some terms typable in the latter are not typable in the former. It enriches local type inference by
allowing only partial type information to be propagated.
Stratified type inference. Beyond its treatment of subtyping, local type inference also brings the idea that
explicit type annotations can be propagated up and down the source tree according to fixed well-defined rules.
This can sometimes be viewed as a preprocessing pass on the source term, which we then called stratified type
inference. When the preprocessing step is simple and intuitive it need not be defined through logical typing
rules, but may instead be defined algorithmically. Such a mechanism was already used in the first prototype
of MLF to move annotations of toplevel definitions to annotations of their respective parameters (Le Botlan,
2004). Here, stratified type inference is used as a secondary tool that helps writing annotations at different
places rather than removing them. The use of stratified type inference as the main tool for performing type
inference for System F has been shown unsatisfactory, even for its rather limited predicative fragment (Rémy,
2005). Stratified type inference has been applied more successfully for performing type inference in ML in the
presence of Guarded Abstract Data Types (GADT) (Pottier and Régis-Gianas, 2006).

5.2

Embedding first-class polymorphism in ML

ML programmers did not wait for solutions to the problem of type inference with first-class polymorphic types
to introduce them in existing languages. Boxing polymorphism is a backup solution that consists in embedding
polymorphic values into first-class ML values. Initially introduced for existential types it was quickly applied to
universal types and later turned into more and more sophisticated proposals, some of which have now been in
use in OCaml or Haskell for several years.
First-class polymorphism in FX The language FX (O’Toole Jr. and Gifford, 1989) seems to be a precursor
of all extensions of ML with first-class polymorphism. Although its expressiveness is somewhat limited—it
approximately fits between boxed polymorphism and Poly-ML described below—FX already contained several of
the ideas reused in some later works. Roughly, FX allows ML implicit topmost quantifiers as in ML type schemes
and explicit first-class quantifiers as in System F, plus constructions to coerce between the two. By definition,
it supersedes both ML and System F, hence its expressiveness. However, expressiveness is achieved by relying
more on explicit than on implicit polymorphism. In particular, an important restriction of FX, which makes
its inference mechanism less expressive than the one of Poly-ML, is that implicit type instantiation remains
predicative. That is, implicit quantifiers can only be instantiated by simple types—types that do not contain
any quantifier. To recover impredicativity, implicit polymorphism may (and often need to) be converted to
explicit polymorphism. Moreover, the type system specification requires typing derivations to be principal,
disallowing any form of weakening, whenever first-class polymorphism is being used. Furthermore, implicit
quantifiers do not commute and are instead inserted in some fixed left-to-right order so that they can later be
unambiguously converted to explicit quantifiers the order of which matters. As a result, although the user need
not always write quantifiers explicitly, he must still usually think in terms of explicit polymorphism.
Boxed polymorphism refers to the encapsulation of first-class polymorphic values into monomorphic ones
via injection and projection functions. In their most basic version, injections and projections are explicit, even
though, in practice, they can be attached to datatype constructors (Läufer and Odersky, 1994; Rémy, 1994).
Typically, preliminary type definitions are made for all polymorphic types that appear in the program. For
instance, the following program defines three versions of ω and applies them to id:
type sid = Sid of ∀(α) α → α
let id = Sid (λ(x) x)
let ω1 = λ(x) let Sid z = x in z z
let ω2 = λ(x) let Sid z = x in z x
let ω3 = λ(x) ω2 x
(ω1 id, ω2 id, ω3 id)

: sid
: ∀(β) sid → (β → β)
: sid → sid
: sid → sid
: ∀(β) (β → β) × sid × sid

The symbol Sid is both used as a constructor in the creation of the polymorphic value id (second line) and
as a destructor when it appears on the left-hand side of let-bindings (third and fourth lines)—or in place of
parameters as in λ(Sid x) x x, which could be an alternative definition of ω1 . Notice the difference between ω1
INRIA

Recasting MLF

49

and ω2 : the former returns the unboxed identity while the latter returns the boxed identity. Here, the coercion
between the two forms must be explicit. This may be quite annoying in practice, as already suggested by the
involved encoding of System F into boxed polymorphism (Odersky and Läufer, 1996). The fifth line shows that
an η-expansion need no type annotation even when the argument is polymorphic.
Poly-ML (Garrigue and Rémy, 1999) is an improvement over this mechanism that replaces the projection
from monotypes to polytypes by a simple place holder h·i, indicating the need for a projection but eluding the
projection itself. It also introduces a notation [· : σ] for embedding polymorphic values into monomorphic ones,
which alleviates the need for prior type definitions. The previous example may be rewritten as follows (where
σid is a meta-level abbreviation for ∀(α) α → α, and boxed polymorphism is represented inside square brackets):
let id = [λ(x) x : σid ]
let ω1 = λ(x : [σid ]) hxi hxi
let ω2 = λ(x : [σid ]) hxi x
let ω3 = λ(x) ω2 x
(ω1 id, ω2 id, ω3 id)
hidi

:
:
:
:
:
:

[σid ]
∀(β) [σid ] → (β → β)
[σid ] → [σid ]
[σid ] → [σid ]
∀(β) (β → β) × [σid ] × [σid ]
∀(β) (β → β)

Explicit type information is still required when creating a polymorphic value (first line). Abstracting over an
(unknown) polymorphic value also requires explicit type information (second and third lines). However, type
information may be omitted when using a known polymorphic value (last line). In fact, polymorphism must
always be known in order to be used. For instance, λ(x) hxi would be rejected. Notice that, we could also have
written ω1 as λ(x : [σid ]) let z = hxi in z z, so as to avoid repeating the projection, much as for the treatment
of type annotations in eMLF. (But this is unsurprising, since eMLF was much inspired by Poly-ML.) The fourth
line shows that η-expansion need no type annotation even when the argument is polymorphic.
The progress made between boxed polymorphism and Poly-ML is significant, which can already be seen
on the encoding of System F into Poly-ML— much simpler than the encoding into boxed polymorphism. Yet,
Poly-ML is not quite satisfactory. In particular, each polymorphic value must still be embedded and so requires
an explicit type annotation at its creation (first line). The explicit type information necessary to build a
polymorphic value is utterly redundant: can a programmer accept to write down a type that is already inferred
by the typechecker? Moreover, this information may be much larger than what one would need to write in
System F. For example, Λα. λ(x : α → α) x must be encoded as [λ(x) x : ∀(α) (α → α) → (α → α)].
Still, when using core Poly-ML to typecheck objects, every polymorphic-method invocation must be explicitly
marked as an instantiation site. To avoid this burden, an extension that has been proposed (and now in use
in OCaml) considers that every method invocation is implicitly a possible instantiation site. However, this
extension requires typing derivations to be principal so as to be non ambiguous—and thus well-defined—in a
pathological case. A similar restriction was already used in FX, but in a more crucial way for the main cases.
Boxy types (Vytiniotis et al., 2006) go one step-further than Poly-ML by removing the “coercion box” of
Poly-ML from the level of expressions—retaining it only at the level of types. In Poly-ML one could define the
ordinary polymorphic identity function λ(x) x with (toplevel) type scheme ∀(α) α → α or the boxed first-class
polymorphic value [λ(x) x : ∀(α) α → α] with polytype [∀(α) α → α]. With boxy types, there is no syntax to
express this difference and instead, it is left to the typechecker to infer which form is meant. While there is an
obvious competition between these two forms, the typing rules are presented in an algorithmic fashion, i.e. as
an algorithm, that (silently) resolves competing cases in favor of one or the other view. The type system has
principal types, but with respect to its algorithmic specification. Unfortunately, it is unknown whether there
is a logic specification of the type system equivalent to the algorithmic presentation. Actually, this is unlikely,
as the logic rules would somehow have to encode the left-to-right evaluation order followed by the algorithmic
rules.
Because boxy types have an algorithmic specification it is difficult to compare them with MLF, precisely. As
they (arbitrarily) privilege propagation of type information from the function type to the argument type, they
can type examples where MLF would require an annotation and thus fail. Conversely, there are many examples
that MLF can type and that boxy types cannot—for some much deeper reason. In particular, if a1 a2 is typable,
then app a1 a2 is not necessarily typable with boxy types—a severe problem. More generally, boxy types are
not conservative with respect to small program transformations, as seen earlier (§4.5).

RR n° 6228

50

Rémy & Le Botlan

As boxy types, MLF also removes the “coercion boxes” of Poly-ML, but does so in a more symmetric way,
without arbitrary choices, by enriching the types of System F just as little as needed to represent all possible
choices in derivations within (unique, principal) types.
Rigid MLF is a restriction of eMLF that restricts the typechecking of let-bindings to use only rigid type
schemes for bound expressions (Leijen, 2007). Interestingly, Rigid MLF can only type programs of System F, as
Simple MLF. In the absence of let-bindings, it does not perform better than MLF. However, it also allows implicit
generalization at let-bindings, as MLF, but remaining within System F, as Simple MLF. Hence, Rigid MLF can use
System F as an intermediate explicitly typed language, which MLF still lacks. Having an intermediate explicitly
typed language is useful for compilers, such as the Haskell compiler, that simultaneously perform aggressive
program transformations and maintain precise type information during compilation. As a corollary, Rigid MLF
can be used as a front end to Haskell.
Unfortunately, Rigid MLF looses principal types in the usual sense—technically it recovers principal types by
using an ad hoc, non logical side condition in typing rules to rule out some otherwise correct typing derivations—
much as in FX. As a result, Rigid MLF is fragile to some minor, but useful program transformations; It also
requires more type annotations than MLF—and the additional type annotations are often annoying.
(Partial) Type inference for the predicative fragment. Odersky and Läufer have also extended boxed
polymorphism to implicit predicative instantiation of rank-2 polymorphism (Odersky and Läufer, 1996), which
was later improved to arbitrary-rank types by Peyton Jones and Shields (Jones and Shields, 2004b; Peyton Jones
et al., 2007). Technically, this approach mixes local type inference with ML-style, unification-based type inference. However, this approach has two serious problems. Inherited from local type inference, and as boxy types
it makes algorithmically specified, arbitrary choices. Moreover, the restriction to predicative polymorphism is
far too drastic (see (Rémy, 2005) for detailed arguments). As a result, this approach is not sufficiently powerful
and can only be used in combination with the more basic form of boxed polymorphism to recover the full power
of System F. This results in a rather complicated language with several not well-integrated idioms to accomplish
similar goals. In fact, this proposal seems to have been dropped in favor of boxy types by the common authors
of both works.
Summary. The different proposals for embedding first-class polymorphism within first-class values are schematically summarized below. Unnanotated arrows mean is weaker than; annotated arrows are only approximations
that applies to the main aspects of the systems but some particular programs may typecheck in the source and
not in the target, with the following meaning for annotations: (1) up to small details; (2) the target is not stable
by η-conversion while the source is; (3) except when relying on the left-to-right bias in the order of arguments
in the source. Double lines are used for type systems enjoying principal types. Oval nodes are used for all
restriction variants of MLF.
Boxy types
FX
(1)
Boxed
Polymorphism

(1)

(2)

(2)

FPH
HMF

HML

Poly-ML
Rigid MLF
Pred. Frag. of F

(3)

MLF

(3)

The languages FPH, HMF, and HML that have been proposed more recently are discussed in § 5.4.

5.3

Comparison with (other presentations of) MLF

We have restricted our investigation to (Shallow) MLF, because it is based on a semantics of types as sets of
System-F types. The original presentation (Le Botlan and Rémy, 2003; Le Botlan, 2004), instead focuses on
the more expressive Full MLF system and introduces Shallow MLF as a restriction of Full MLF. We first compare

INRIA

Recasting MLF

51

(Shallow) MLF, with the original, Full and Shallow versions, successively. We then discuss the more recent
graphical presentation of MLF (Rémy and Yakobowski, 2007, 2008a).
Comparison with Full MLF. Although the original presentation was about Full eMLF, and the comparison
should a priori be made with eMLF, there is little to say about type inference, but more about expressiveness.
We thus consider the simpler, implicitly typed version Full iMLF and compare it with iMLF.
Types of iMLF are stratified: they distinguish between types, which are isomorphic to System-F types, and
can be used to form arrow types, from type schemes, which can only be used as such or in the bound of variables
to form other type schemes. By contrast, types are not stratified in Full iMLF and instead are identified with
type schemes, as follows:
τ, σ ∈ TFull ::= α | τ → τ | ∀(α ≥ τ ) τ | ⊥
In particular, Full iMLF allows proper flexible types σ, e.g. ∀(α≥σ ′ ) τ to appear in positions where polymorphism
is required, as in σ → ∀(α) α, which is a type of Full iMLF but not of iMLF. For this reason, our semantics for
iMLF does not easily extend to Full iMLF.
The problem may be illustrated by considering the semantics of the simpler type σ → int. In iMLF, σ is
restricted to be a type τ of System F, i.e. whose semantics is a singleton {t}. Hence, the semantics of σ → int
could be simply defined as the singleton {t → int}. In Full iMLF, σ may be a proper flexible type, i.e. one
whose semantics is not a singleton type. What should be the semantics of σ → int in this case? Certainly
not {t → int | t ∈ {{σ}}}, as this is the semantics of ∀(α ≥ σ) α → int, which is quite different from σ → int.
Intuitively, {{σ → int}} should describe the type of functions that require their argument to have all types in
{{σ}}. A temptation is to write “{{σ}} → int”, but this is ill-formed since {{σ}} is a set of types, not a type.
It is actually instructive to draw an analogy with intersection types (which can be used to model finite sets
of types) where the intersection ∧ distributes on the right-hand side of arrow types, but not on its left-hand
side. (τ1 ∧ τ2 ) → τ is not equivalent to (τ1 → τ ) ∧ (τ2 → τ ). Hence, intersection types of the form (τ1 ∧ τ2 ) → τ ,
which are not intersection of System-F types, are essential. This suggests that extending the semantics of iMLF
to Full iMLF would have to go beyond sets of System-F types, and perhaps, introduce a form of infinitary
intersection types. However, these would have to be studied on their own first, which is likely to be more
difficult than studying Full iMLF types alone!
Comparison with the Original. There remain a few differences between MLF we presented here and the
original Shallow MLF (Le Botlan and Rémy, 2003) that are not just a matter of presentation. For the sake of
comparison and by contrast with above, we here consider the explicitly typed versions.
The abstraction relation ⊏
− in this version of eMLF is larger than the original one so that eMLF coincides
F
exactly with iML . This is an improvement, as it follows from the semantics of iMLF and its canonical definition
of type-instance by interpretation of types as sets of System-F types.
This difference in the definition of abstraction is unimportant in practice, even though we may easily build
an example in eMLF that is not in the original version. For instance, consider the types σ1 and σ2 , respectively
defined as ∀(α ≥ ∀(β ⇒ σid ) β → β) α → α and ∀(β ⇒ σid ) (β → β) → β → β. We have σ1 ⊏
− σ2 and σ2 ⊐
− σ1 ,
hence σ1 ⊏
−
− σ2 . That is, types σ1 and σ2 can be (explicitly) converted to one another. However, in the original
⊐
version we do not have σ1 ⊏
−o σ2 but only σ1 ⊑o σ2 (subscript o stands for the original version). Therefore,
only σ1 is (implicitly) convertible to σ2 by type instance but σ2 is not convertible to σ1 in the original version.
More precisely, the program λ(x : σ2 ) (x : σ1 ) is in our version of MLF but not in the original one.
This improvement in the definition of the abstraction relation was first suggested by François Pottier.
However, its naive formalization in the original version would not be correct, because of pathological contexts
in which uses of unprotected abstraction would break type soundness, as explained in §4.1 (page 31). In order
to prevents these misuses of abstraction, we introduced the auxiliary relation ⊏
−♯ in the definition of ⊏
−. Quite
interestingly, this change, which appears to be a small complication in the syntactic presentation of abstraction
is actually a simplification when we view types as graphs (Rémy and Yakobowski, 2007), as described below.
There are other minor differences with the original presentation. For instance, the encoding of System F into
eMLF we have presented is different from the original one, as explained page 37. More precisely, the abstraction
relation defines a lattice over types, as shown in (Le Botlan, 2004). A given type of System F corresponds to
several types in the lattice, any of which could be chosen as its default encoding. In (Le Botlan, 2004), we chose

RR n° 6228

52

Rémy & Le Botlan

the meet of all candidates, which is easier to build. In this paper, we chose their join, favoring the shortness of
the proof.
Comparison with the graphical presentation. A graphic presentation of MLF types and type-instance
has recently been proposed (Rémy and Yakobowski, 2007) and their application to graphical typing constraints
is ongoing work. These works are complementary, as both bring different enlightenment on MLF and its instance
relation. In this work the instance relation is derived from a more canonical definition as sets of System-F types.
In the graphic presentation, it is derived from type instance on first-order types and natural, simple operations
on the binding tree. While, the semantics definition of type instance does not easily generalize to Full MLF,
the graphic presentation is in fact directly defined in Full MLF. The graphic presentation is also targeted at
performing efficient type inference, which we did not address in this work.

5.4

Ongoing works around MLF

Although eMLF requires very few type annotations, and has a simple criterion for where and when to provide them, two criticisms have been made, namely the lack of an internal explicitly typed language and the
introduction of “unfamiliar” types. These have motivated ongoing works on finding restrictions of MLF that
would circumvent these issues. Unsurprisingly, any limitation come at some price, increasing the number of
required type annotations and losing robustness to program transformations and other interesting properties of
MLF—such as preservation of typing by reduction.
An internal, explicitly typed language for MLF. An argument against the use MLF has been that
programs cannot be elaborated into terms of System F. The system Flet is certainly not meant to be a replacement
for System F as an internal language because the translation from MLF to Flet does not preserve the modularity
properties of MLF.
The problem with finding an internal language for eMLF is that source terms contain type annotations that
must be transformed during reduction, as shown in the original work (Le Botlan and Rémy, 2003).
Fortunately, an internal language, called x MLF, has just been proposed for MLF (Rémy and Yakobowski,
2008b). This language generalizes type abstraction of System F by introducing flexible bounds on type variables and replaces type applications by instantiations—a small sub-language describing exactly how types are
instantiated. Type annotations of MLF are translated by type instantiations in x MLF, which can then be
transformed during reduction so as to maintain well-typedness.
This improves over the only previously known alternative that is to insert coercion functions so as to remain
within System F (Leijen and Löh, 2005). Indeed, those coercions are retained at runtime with an unnecessary
runtime cost, in particular due to duplication of data structures. Furthermore, it has never been proved that
the insertion of these coercion functions actually preserves the semantics of programs.
Strange looking types. Types of eMLF may look unfamiliar because they use two new forms of quantification: flexible and rigid bindings. It has been argued that this might hinder the adoption of MLF. We agree
that types of MLF are sometimes harder to print and read because they are richer. However, the introduction
of both flexible and rigid quantification has been driven by properties and program transformations that should
hold in a reasonable type inference system.
Flexible types are used to factor into a principal typing derivation of MLF, correct but incomparable derivations of System F. As a side effect, they also increase expressiveness, although this was not their first purpose.
Flexible types now have some simple semantic explanation, which may help them look more familiar.
Rigid types do not increase expressiveness, but introduce extra information that partially remembers the
way types have been derived, and in particular, distinguishes polymorphism that has been requested from
polymorphism that has been provided. Even though rigid types may not be justified by semantic arguments,
they mainly mimic flexible types in the way they keep track of sharing. Hopefully, they will look more familiar
once flexible types will be well-understood and used.
Eliminating the need for rigid bindings. Leijen has identified a quite interesting restriction of MLF, called
HML, that does not use rigid bindings at all, but still permits type inference (Leijen, 2009). His proposal,
inspired by iMLF, could have been described as a stable subset of eMLF, which we explain below.
Leijen’s restriction proposal can be summarized as disallowing the use of rigid bindings in the prefix of typing
judgments. As a result, all other rigid bindings, i.e. appearing in the typing environment or the result type
INRIA

Recasting MLF

53

become local and can be locally maximally shared. Below, we call restricted typing judgments of eMLF that
do not use rigid binding in prefixes and where all other types are maximally shared. When rigid bindings are
maximally shared in types, they may be printed inlined and look as iMLF types.
In order to allow all judgments to be restricted, we use derived rules App⋆ and Fun⋆⋆ instead of App and
Annot in derivations, which we call restricted derivations. The rule Fun⋆⋆ is the following variant of Fun⋆ :
Fun⋆⋆

(Q) Γ, x : ρ ⊢ a : ∀(Q′ ) τ
ᾱ ⊆ dom(Q)
′
(Q) Γ ⊢ λ(x : ∃ (ᾱ) ρ) a : ∀(Q , β ⇒ ρ) β → τ
That avoids the need for putting rigid bindings in the prefix Q. We still allow rigid bindings to appear in
derivations of instantiation and abstraction judgments (although we could also introduce derived rules instead).
Interestingly, under restricted prefixes, ⊐
−; ⊑ steps may always be turned into ⊑; ⊐
− steps—a result that does
not hold in general. This implies that under restricted prefixes, imposing maximal sharing in τ and Γ does not
restrict typability. Formally, if Q is a restricted prefix and (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ and Γ ⊏
− Γ′ (when ⊏
− is extended to type
′
′
′
environments pointwise), then there exists σ such that (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ and σ ⊏
− σ ′ . This enables to transform
any restricted derivation of a judgment in restricted form into one where all intermediate judgments are also in
restricted form. In such derivations, revelation needs never be used. By forcing maximal sharing in Γ, we may
be forced to do more sharing in σ ′ as well; however, this is harmless, as this sharing could always—but never
need to—be recovered a posteriori by a single final revelation.
The cost of bridling MLF to restricted derivations is that all polymorphic arguments must be annotated
regardless of whether they are treated parametrically or used polymorphically. Consequently, typing judgments
are not themselves stable by arbitrary substitutions (but only by monotype ones). In particular, preservation
of typings by β-reduction is lost. In practice, this also means that polymorphic types are not quite first class
citizens. For instance, replacing a ground datatype by its Church encoding, e.g. replacing int by nat where
nat is an abbreviation for ∀(α) (α → α) → α → α, does not preserve typability. This also means that data
structures with inner but passive polymorphism (that is just stored in data-structures or passed around to
functions) cannot be used as conveniently as similar data structures where polymorphism has been abstracted
away as a new ground or simple type.
In addition, this version requires additional type annotations, which may sometimes be surprising and
unpleasant. For example, (λ(x) λ(y) x y) ω † (1) is typable but its reduct λ(y) ω † y is not. That is, extratype annotations need to be inserted during reduction. The drawback is that the user may be tempted to
write programs with extra, obfuscating abstractions that also have a runtime cost, just to avoid extra type
annotations. The example above also illustrate the lost of stability by both η-expansion and β-reduction.
Consequently, although HML type inference engine is in essence more powerful and more practical than that of
Poly-ML, it is not strictly speaking an extension of Poly-ML.
Nevertheless, this remains an interesting variant of MLF as it preserves principal types and the logical flavor
of typing rules, as well as interesting program transformation such as abstraction of application, as shown
in (1), or let-conversion. Moreover, the use of simpler types that moreover coincide with those of iMLF is
unquestionably a clear gain.
Depriving MLF from flexible bindings has also been proposed by Leijen (Leijen, 2007) and called HMF.
However, this is a drastic restriction that does not interact well with type inference. In particular, the two typings
of choose id cannot be captured by a principal type without flexible typings. Hence, principal types per se are
lost. They may be recovered by an ad hoc non logical side condition that disallows one of the two typings—in
fact, the choice is always made in favor of more external polymorphism, so as to remain compatible with ML.
Unsurprisingly, the robustness of the type system to program transformation is really lost. For example, one
may no longer always abstract over type applications or share common subexpressions in let-bindings.
Back to System F-types. The two restrictions of MLF to HMF or HML are independent of one another
and can be combined together (Leijen, 2009). The result is attractive because types then look just as regular
System-F types. Unfortunately, the drawbacks accumulate and are so important that the author of the proposal
does not himself recommend dropping flexible bindings (Leijen, 2009).
Yet, another proposal by Vytiniotis et al (Vytiniotis et al., 2008), called FPH, which looks quite different in
presentation, using boxes to keep track of impredicative type instantiations, is of comparable expressive power,
and interestingly, can also be explained using the MLF framework.
RR n° 6228

54

Rémy & Le Botlan

As for HMF, rigid types are disallowed in the prefix and therefore they can always be maximally shared.
Alternatively, types may be considered up to abstraction, as in iMLF. This may actually be made explicit
by introducing an additional bound “=” that stands for equivalence and behaves as “⇒” except for the two
following differences: firstly, under a prefix containing α = σ, we have α ≡ σ, i.e. both σ ⊏
− α and α ⊏
− σ;
secondly, turning a rigid binding into an equivalence binding is part of revelation but not of equivalence—except
for monotype bounds which can always be inlined. The second fact is the key to FPH that requires explicit
type annotations to confirm impredicative type instantiations, and so disambiguate between predicative and
impredicative type instantiations.
Interestingly, FPH can now be explained by restricting typing judgments Q, Γ ⊢ a : σ of MLF so that Q is
always the empty prefix, flexible bindings are never used in Γ nor in σ, and rigid bindings are only used at the
toplevel of σ. Equivalence bounds can be printed inlined in FPH. Rigid bindings represent boxed types. As
they can always be maximally shared, as in HMF, they can also be printed inlined.
While FPH has a modular type inference algorithm, in the sense that typechecking of let-bound expressions
need not be delayed, it does not enjoy principal types, because flexible bindings may only be used internally,
for type inference, but may not appear in the result of type inference. For this reason, choose id does not have
a principal type.
Of course, despite the benefit that the user need not (in principle) be exposed to boxed types but only to
System-F types, this proposal loses many modularity properties of MLF, much as the combination of HML and
HMF. Moreover, rigid types (i.e., boxes) cannot be really hidden from the user when displaying type errors. In
fact, even flexible types, which are used internally, would help explaining type errors. The absence of principal
types in FPH also implies that interfaces of compilation units must always be given explicitly.
Viewing FPH in the framework of MLF has some advantages. It first shows, even though we did not make all
the details explicit, that FPH is a subset of MLF, as already noticed by its authors. It also emphasizes the strong
relations between FPH and HML, originally remarked by Leijen. Additionally, it suggests a simpler presentation
of FPH where the subtyping relation allows extra boxing so that equality-up-to-unboxing side conditions on the
application and annotation typing rules can be removed, leading to a more traditional presentation of FPH in
the style of our generic type system.
Despite their drawbacks and limitations when compared with MLF, both FPH and HML (with or without
flexible bindings), may be interesting in several ways: they show that rigid bindings are not necessary for
the sole purpose of type inference, but only for getting more type inference and more robustness to program
transformations. They may also allow a faster migration of existing languages based on Hindley-Milner type
systems to type systems with first class-polymorphism, in particular in the case of Haskell which uses System F
as an internal language.
MLF with graphical types is a parallel work where a graph-based representation of types and of the type
instance relation is used to simplify their definitions and explore the different variants more systematically. Hopefully, graphic types provide better intuitions on both flexible and rigid bindings and will help for their acceptance.
Simple notational conventions can also be used to display eMLF as System-F types in many cases (Rémy and
Yakobowski, 2008a).
The graph representation has already enabled a new, efficient unification algorithm for MLF types. It is
currently used to revisit, improve and modularize type inference for MLF. As mentioned earlier (§2.3, page 19),
this work validates a posteriori the design choices made in the definition of the instance relation of eMLF.
Graphs have also helped find an internal language x MLF (Rémy and Yakobowski, 2008b).
Finally, graphs bring syntactic and semantic types closer. Interestingly, the graph representation applies
indifferently to the shallow or full versions, and might be a means to also give a semantics to Full MLF.

5.5

Future works

MLF types are strictly—but only slightly—more expressive than System-F types. One may wonder whether they
could be subsumed by higher-order types. We think that the two mechanisms are complementary and equally
desired. We already see two solutions to higher-order polymorphism.
A limited form of higher-order polymorphism can be obtained with the use of higher-order kinds, which
treats type operators as first-order type variables. This allows abstraction and instantiation of type operators,
but not any reduction at the level of types. Technically, a type application F (τ ) where F is a type operator is
treated as an application @(F, τ ) where @ is an application operator and F can be treated as an ordinary type,
but of a higher-order kind. This extension is minor and only differs in the introduction of kinds, which are easy to

INRIA

Recasting MLF

55

keep track of. Interestingly, instantiation of type operators can then be inferred as all other type-instantiations
in MLF.
Another solution that would better integrate higher-order types and reach all of Fω is to use a distinct
universal quantifier at higher kinds with type introduction and type elimination constructs that would always
be explicit at higher kinds.
Although, inferring instantiation of type operators at higher-order kinds seems possible in some interesting
cases, type-level computation resulting from instantiation of higher-order types seems to be conflicting with the
precise sharing between polymorphic types that has to be maintained in MLF. Studying this interaction remains
an interesting research direction.
Extending MLF with recursive types is another interesting investigation to pursue. In the presence of type
inference, one would expect implicit equi-recursive types to be used, as in ML. While we anticipate no difficulty
with monomorphic recursion, the problem seems much harder when recursion crosses polymorphic boundaries.
A solution might have to combine implicit monomorphic equi and explicit polymorphic iso recursive types,
altogether.
Extensions of MLF-types with subtyping, type constraints, assertions, etc. are of course also worth exploring.

6

Conclusions

In our quest for better integration of first-class polymorphism within ML, we have come up with MLF—a new
type system for second-order polymorphism that is actually two-fold.
The Curry-style version iMLF just extends second-order types with flexible bindings so as to capture instances
of a given type as a single type scheme. This is written ∀(α ≥ σ) σ ′ , meaning that α may be replaced by any
instance of σ in σ ′ . Types schemes are interpreted by sets of System-F types. The instance relation on types is
defined as set inclusion of their semantics. The language iMLF is a subset of Flet , an extension of System F with
a very restricted form of intersection types that contains exactly all let-expansions of System-F expressions.
We have also proposed a Church-style version eMLF that permits type inference. Expressions of eMLF,
given with some explicit type annotations, always have principal types13 . Technically, eMLF introduces rigid
bindings written ∀(α ⇒ σ) σ ′ to mediate between explicit type information σ and its implicit view α within σ ′ .
Interestingly, eMLF is a conservative extension of ML as fully unannotated programs are typable in eMLF if and
only if they are typable in ML. Moreover, all System F programs can be turned into eMLF programs by simply
dropping type abstractions and type applications and by a simple translation of type annotations. Besides,
only function arguments that are used polymorphically need a type annotation in eMLF. This provides a clear
specification of when and how to annotate type parameters.
We believe that MLF is a user-friendly extension of ML with first-class polymorphism. Additionally, without
significantly departing from System F, programs in iMLF have more-expressive types (and more principal types)
than in System F and are therefore more modular and more robust to program transformations.
Although there are still a few options in the design space, eMLF seems to be a local optimal, where any
restriction looses some of its interesting properties and any extension in expressiveness would very likely require
a form of higher-order unification. The restriction of MLF to flexible-only bindings (Leijen, 2009) is another
interesting point in the design space that might be another alternative, a less expressive but simpler surface
language for iMLF.

Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Boris Yakobowski for many technical discussions and his expertise on the graphic
presentation of MLF. We express our gratitude to Daan Leijen and Dimitrios Vytiniotis whose interesting
insight on MLF helped us improve the technical content of this article. We thank the anonymous referees for
their precious comments.

Proofs of main results
Proof of Lemma 3.3.8
By structural induction on σ.
13 This has only been shown formally for a small variant of eMLF (Le Botlan and Rémy, 2003; Le Botlan, 2004).

RR n° 6228

56

Rémy & Le Botlan

◦ Case α: Obviously, α is exposed in σ, therefore t must be inert. To conclude, observe that both {{⌊θ⌋(σ)}}
and θ({{σ}}) are equal to {t}.
◦ Case β with β 6= α: Then, both {{⌊θ⌋(σ)}} and θ({{σ}}) are equal to {β}.
◦ Case τ1 → τ2 : Then, both {{⌊θ⌋(σ)}} and θ({{σ}}) are equal to {θ(τ1 ) → θ(τ2 )}.
◦ Case ⊥: Let t′ be in {{θ(⊥)}}, that is {{⊥}}, with α ∈
/ ftv(t′ ). Then θ(t′ ) = t′ , which we may also write
′
′
′
t ∈ θ({t }). Thus, t ∈ θ({{⊥}}) holds.
◦ Case ∀(β ≥ σ1 ) σ2 : Let t′ be in {{⌊θ⌋(σ)}} with α ∈
/ ftv(t′ ) (1). We may assume β # dom(θ) ∪ codom(θ)
w.l.o.g. Then, ⌊θ⌋(σ) is equal to ∀(β ≥ ⌊θ⌋(σ1 )) ⌊θ⌋(σ2 ). By Definition 3.2.1, t′ is of the form ∀(γ̄) t2 [t1 /β] with
γ̄ # ftv(⌊θ⌋(σ)), t1 ∈ {{⌊θ⌋(σ1 )}} and t2 ∈ {{⌊θ⌋(σ2 )}} (2). We may assume α ∈
/ γ̄, w.l.o.g. If α is not exposed in
σ, it must also be not exposed in σ1 and in σ2 by Definition 3.3.6. Moreover, (1) implies both α ∈
/ ftv(t2 ) and
α∈
/ ftv(t1 ). By induction hypothesis applied to (2), we get t2 ∈ θ({{σ2 }}) and t1 ∈ θ({{σ1 }}). That is, t1 and
t2 are of the form θ(t′1 ) and θ(t′2 ) with t′1 ∈ {{σ1 }} and t′2 ∈ {{σ2 }}. Therefore, t′ is equal to ∀(γ̄) θ(t′2 )[θ(t′1 )/β],
which implies that t′ is also equal to θ(∀(γ̄) t′2 [t′1 /β]). By definition 3.2.1, we have t′ ∈ θ({{σ}}), as expected.

Proof of Lemma 3.3.9
Each rule is considered separately.
◦ Case iEqu-Comm: Let σa be ∀(α1 ≥σ1 ) ∀(α2 ≥σ2 ) σ and σb be ∀(α2 ≥σ2 ) ∀(α1 ≥σ1 ) σ, with α1 ∈
/ ftv(σ2 ) (1)
and α2 ∈
/ ftv(σ1 ) (2). Our goal is to show {{σa }} = {{σb }}, which implies the expected result θ({{σa }}) = θ({{σb }})
for all θ ∈ {{Q}}. By symmetry, it suffices to show {{σa }} ⊆ {{σb }}. Let ta be an F-type in {{σa }}. We show that ta
is also in {{σb }} (3). By Definition 3.2.1, ta is of the form ∀(β̄) t′ [t1 /α1 ] (4) with β̄ # ftv(σa ), t′ ∈ {{∀(α2 ≥σ2 ) σ}},
and t1 ∈ {{σ1 }}. By Definition 3.2.1, t′ is in turn of the form ∀(β¯′ ) t[t2 /α2 ] (5) with β¯′ # ftv(∀(α2 ≥ σ2 ) σ),
t ∈ {{σ}}, and t2 ∈ {{σ2 }} (6). By α-conversion, we may assume, w.l.o.g., α2 ∈
/ ftv(t1 ) ∪ {α1 } (7) and β̄ ′ #
ftv(t1 ) ∪ {α1 } ∪ ftv(σ1 ). By inlining (5) in (4), it appears that ta is equal to ∀(β̄ β¯′ ) t[t2 /α2 ][t1 /α1 ]. By (7),
we may commute the two substitutions in ta and obtain ∀(β̄ β̄ ′ ) t[t1 /α1 ][t2 [t1 /α1 ]/α2 ]. Let t′2 be t2 [t1 /α1 ]. It
follows from (6) that t′2 belongs to {{σ2 }}[t1 /α1 ], which is included in {{σ2 [t1 /α1 ]}} by Lemma 3.3.5. The latter
equals {{σ2 }}, given (1). In summary, ta is equal to ∀(β̄ β̄ ′ ) t[t1 /α1 ][t′2 /α2 ] with t′2 ∈ {{σ2 }} and β̄ β¯′ # ftv(σb ),
which implies (3) by Definition 3.2.1.
◦ Case iEqu-Free: Let σ with α ∈
/ ftv(σ). We show {{σ}} = {{∀(α ≥ σ ′ ) σ}} by considering both inclusions
separately. Assume t ∈ {{σ}}. We may as well assume α ∈
/ ftv(t), w.l.o.g. Then, t is trivially of the form t[t′ /α],
′
′
by choosing some arbitrary t in {{σ }}, which implies t ∈ {{∀(α ≥ σ ′ ) σ}}. Conversely, assume t ∈ {{∀(α ≥ σ ′ ) σ}}.
By Definition 3.2.1, it is of the form ∀(β̄) t′′ [t′ /α] with t′′ ∈ {{σ}} and t′ ∈ {{σ ′ }}. Thus, t ∈ ∀(β̄) {{σ}}[t′ /α]. By
Lemma 3.3.5, this implies t ∈ ∀(β̄) {{σ[⌊t′ ⌋/α]}}, that is, t ∈ {{σ}} by Lemma 3.3.4.
◦ Case iEqu-Var is by definition and Lemma 3.3.4.
◦ Case iEqu-Inert: by hypothesis, (α ≥ σ ′ ) ∈ Q. Thus, Q is of the form (Q1 , α ≥ σ ′ , Q2 ) for some Q1
and Q2 . Let θ be in {{Q}}. By definition, a canonical decomposition of θ is of the form θ1 ◦ [ta /α] ◦ θ2 (8)
for some θ1 ∈ {{Q1 }}, θ2 ∈ {{Q2 }}, and ta ∈ {{σ ′ }}. Since by hypothesis (Q) σ ′ ⊏
−
− τ , where τ is an inert
⊐
type, this implies ta = ⌈τ ⌉ (9) by induction hypothesis. By Lemma 3.2.6, θ is equal to θ ◦ [ta /α]. Therefore,
θ({{σ}}) = θ({{σ}}[⌈τ ⌉/α]), which implies θ({{σ}}) ⊆ θ({{σ[τ /α]}}) by Lemma 3.3.5. As for the converse inclusion,
let t be in θ({{σ[τ /α]}}). There exists t′ such that t = θ(t′ ) and t′ ∈ {{σ[τ /α]}}. Let t′′ be t′ [⌈τ ⌉/α]. We notice
that θ(t′′ ) = θ ◦ [⌈τ ⌉/α](t′ ) = θ(t′ ) (10) = t, where (10) is obtained by Lemma 3.2.6, (8), and (9). Besides,
by Lemma 3.3.5, t′′ belongs to {{σ[τ /α]}}. Since, by construction, α ∈
/ ftv(t′′ ), we get t′′ ∈ {{σ}}[⌈τ ⌉/α] as a
consequence of Lemma 3.3.8, Therefore, t belongs to θ({{σ}}[⌈τ ⌉/α]), that is, θ({{σ}}).

Proof of Property 3.3.11
The proof of (i) holds by structural induction on the derivation. The proof of (ii) is by structural induction on
σ.

INRIA

Recasting MLF

57

Proof of Lemma 3.3.12
Each rule is considered separately. Rule iIns-Equiv is by Lemma 3.3.9. Rule iIns-Bot is by definition. For
Rule iIns-Subst, it suffices to show {{σ[τ /α]}} ⊆ {{∀(α ≥ τ ) σ}}. Let t be in {{σ[τ /α]}}. We may assume
that α ∈
/ ftv(t), w.l.o.g. Besides, by hypothesis, α is not exposed in σ. Thus, by Lemma 3.3.8, we have
t ∈ {{σ}}[⌈τ ⌉/α]. This implies t ∈ {{∀(α ≥ τ ) σ}} by Definition 3.2.1, which is as expected. For iIns-Hyp, we
assume (α ≥ σ) ∈ Q, i.e. Q of the form (Q1 , α ≥ σ, Q2 ). Assume θ ∈ {{Q}}. By Definition 3.2.3, θ is of the
form θ1 ◦ [t/α] ◦ θ2 . with t ∈ {{σ}} and the decomposition is canonical. By Lemma 3.2.6, [t/α] ◦ θ2 is equal to
[t/α] ◦ θ2 ◦ [t/α]. Composing by θ1 on the left, we get that θ is equal to θ ◦ [t/α]. Therefore θ(α) is θ(t), which
implies θ(α) ∈ θ({{σ}}). Thus (Q) σ ≤ α holds, as expected.

Proof of Lemma 3.5.1
Necessarily, t is ∀(ᾱ) τ ′ and t′ is ∀(β̄) τ ′ [τ̄ /ᾱ] with β̄ # ftv(t). If τ ′ is some variable α with α ∈ ᾱ, then ⌊t⌋
is equivalent to ⊥ by iEqu-Var, and we conclude directly by iIns-Bot. From now on, we assume t is not a
variable α in ᾱ. As a consequence, all α’s in ᾱ are not exposed in ⌊t⌋ (1). We have
⌊t⌋

=
=
−
⊏
−
⊐
≤
≤
=
=

∀(ᾱ) ⌊τ ′ ⌋
∀(ᾱ ≥ ⊥) ⌊τ ′ ⌋
∀(β̄) ∀(ᾱ ≥ ⊥) ⌊τ ′ ⌋
∀(β̄) ∀(ᾱ ≥ τ̄ ) ⌊τ ′ ⌋
∀(β̄) ⌊τ ′ ⌋[⌊τ¯⌋/ᾱ]
⌊∀(β̄) τ ′ [τ̄ /ᾱ]⌋
⌊t′ ⌋

by notation
by iEqu-Free
by iIns-Bot and congruence
by iIns-Subst and (1)
by definition

We conclude by transitivity of ≤.

Proof of Theorem 1
By induction on the derivation of F :: Γ ⊢ a : t. Let Q be a prefix binding the free variables of Γ and t.
◦ Case Var: By hypothesis, we have x : t ∈ Γ. By definition of ⌊Γ⌋, we have x : ⌊t⌋ ∈ ⌊Γ⌋, and ⌊Γ⌋ is closed
under Q. Hence, (Q) ⌊Γ⌋ ⊢ x : ⌊t⌋ holds by Var.
◦ Case App: Then, a is of the form a1 a2 and the premises are F :: Γ ⊢ a1 : t2 → t1 and F :: Γ ⊢ a2 : t2 . Let
Q′ be an unconstrained prefix binding ftv(t2 ) \ dom(Q). This implies dom(Q′ ) # ftv(⌊A⌋) (1) and dom(Q′ ) #
ftv(t1 ) (2). By induction hypothesis, we have both (QQ′ ) ⌊Γ⌋ ⊢ a1 : ⌊t2 → t1 ⌋ (3) and (QQ′ ) ⌊Γ⌋ ⊢ a2 : ⌊t2 ⌋ (4).
By definition, ⌊t2 → t1 ⌋ is ⌊t2 ⌋ → ⌊t1 ⌋. Hence, (3) becomes (QQ′ ) ⌊Γ⌋ ⊢ a1 : ⌊t2 ⌋ → ⌊t1 ⌋. By App, we get
(QQ′ ) ⌊Γ⌋ ⊢ a1 a2 : ⌊t1 ⌋. By Gen and (1), we get (Q) ⌊Γ⌋ ⊢ a1 a2 : ∀(Q′ ) ⌊t1 ⌋. By equivalence (Inst and
iEqu-Free with (2)), we obtain the expect result (Q) ⌊Γ⌋ ⊢ a1 a2 : ⌊t1 ⌋.
◦ Case Inst: The premises are F :: Γ ⊢ a : t′ and t′ ≤F t (5). By induction hypothesis, we have (Q) ⌊Γ⌋ ⊢ a :
⌊t′ ⌋ (6). By Lemma 3.5.1 and (5), we have (Q) ⌊t′ ⌋ ≤ ⌊t⌋. We conclude by Inst.
◦ Case Fun: The premise is F :: Γ, x : t1 ⊢ a : t2 . By induction, we have (Q) ⌊Γ⌋, x : ⌊t1 ⌋ ⊢ a : ⌊t2 ⌋. By Rule
Fun, we get the expected result (Q) ⌊Γ⌋ ⊢ λ(x) a : ⌊t1 ⌋ → ⌊t2 ⌋.
◦ Case Gen: The premise is F :: Γ ⊢ a : t′ and α ∈
/ ftv(Γ) (7). By induction, we have (Q, α) ⌊Γ⌋ ⊢ a : ⌊t′ ⌋.
Besides, (7) implies α ∈
/ ftv(⌊Γ⌋). By Rule Gen, we get (Q) ⌊Γ⌋ ⊢ a : ∀(α) ⌊t′ ⌋, that is, (Q) ⌊Γ⌋ ⊢ a : ⌊∀(α) t′ ⌋.

Proof of Lemma 3.6.1
By induction on the derivation of (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ. We simultaneously show that for any x : ∧(ti )i∈I in ∆, we
have x : σ in Γ such that (θ(ti ) ∈ θ({{σ}}))i∈I . All cases are straightforward, except iF-Inst, which relies on
Lemma 3.3.12.

RR n° 6228

58

Rémy & Le Botlan

Proof of Lemma 3.6.2
By induction on the derivation of (Q ∋ θ) Γ ⊢ a : σ ∋ t ⇒ ∆. We show a stronger result, that is, Flet ::
θ({{Γ}}), ∆ ∧ ∆′ ⊢ a : θ(t) holds for any context ∆′ such that dom(∆′ ) # dom({{Γ}}) (1). All cases are
straightforward, except iF-Gen, which can be shown as follows. We reuse the notations of rule iF-Gen.
By definition, we must have θ(∀(β̄) t′ [t/α]) in θ({{∀(α ≥ σ) σ ′ }}). As the last rule of the derivation is iFGen, we must have (Q, α ≥ σ ∋ θ ◦ [t/α]) Γ ⊢ a : σ ′ ∋ t′ ⇒ ∆ (2), α ∈
/ ftv(Γ) (3), and β̄ # dom(Q) (4)
hold. By induction hypothesis applied to (2), we get Flet :: θ ◦ [t/α]({{Γ}}), ∆ ∧ ∆′ ⊢ a : θ(t′ [t/α]) (5) for
any ∆′ satisfying the hypothesis (1). From (3), we have θ ◦ [t/α]({{Γ}}) = θ({{Γ}}). Thus, from (5), we have
Flet :: θ({{Γ}}), ∆ ∧ ∆′ ⊢ a : θ(t′ [t/α]) (6). From (4), we have β̄ # ftv({{Γ}}) ∪ ftv(∆). By α-conversion, we may
also assume β̄ # ftv(∆′ ), w.l.o.g. We may thus conclude with rule Gen applied to (6).

Proof of Theorem 2
This is an immediate consequence of Lemmas 3.6.1 and 3.6.2.

Proof of Lemma 4.1.11
Each statement is shown separately, by induction on the given derivation.
Let us consider the equivalence relation first (statement i). Reflexivity is immediate. Transitivity and
symmetry are by induction hypothesis. As for congruence (rules eCon-AllLeft and eCon-AllRight), we
consider two cases:
◦ Case ⇒-congruence: By hypothesis, σ1 is ∀(α⇒σa ) σa′ and σ2 is ∀(α⇒σb ) σb′ . The premises are (Q) σa ≡ σb
and (Q, α ⇒ σb ) σa′ ≡ σb′ . We have to show (Q′ ) θ(Tσa′ U[Tσa U/α]) ⊏
−
− θ(Tσb′ U[Tσb U/α]). By induction hypothesis,
⊐
′
′
′
we have (Q ) θTσa U ⊏
−
− θ(Tσb U) (1) and (Q ) θ(Tσa U[Tσb U/α]) ⊏
⊐
−
− θ(Tσb′ U[Tσb U/α]) (2). By Lemma 3.3.11.ii
⊐
′
′
′
(page 23) and (1), we have (Q ) θ(Tσa U)[θ(Tσa U)/α] ⊏
−
− θ(Tσa U)[θ(Tσb U)/α], that is, (Q′ ) θ(Tσa′ U[Tσa U/α]) ⊏
⊐
−
−
⊐
′
θ(Tσa U[Tσb U/α]). We conclude by transitivity and (2).
◦ Case ≥-congruence: By hypothesis, σ1 is ∀(α ≥ σa ) σa′ and σ2 is ∀(α ≥ σb ) σb′ . The premises are (Q) σa ≡ σb
and (Q, α ≥ σb ) σa′ ≡ σb′ . By induction hypothesis, the former gives (Q′ ) θTσa U ⊏
−
− θTσb U (3). We consider two
⊐
subcases:
Subcase σb ∈
/ V: Then, we get by induction hypothesis (Q′ , α ≥ θ(Tσb U)) θTσa′ U ⊏
−
− θTσb′ U. By iCon⊐
′
′
AllLeft, iCon-AllRight and (3), we get (Q ) ∀(α ≥ θ(Tσa U)) θTσa U ⊏
−
− ∀(α ≥ θ(Tσb U)) θTσb′ U (4). If
⊐
σa ∈
/ V, this is the expected result. Otherwise, σa ≡ β, which implies (Q) σb ≡ β, and then by Lemma 4.1.7,
σb ≡ τ ′ (5) for some type τ ′ . Since σb ∈
/ V, this implies τ ′ ∈
/ V (6). By iCon-AllLeft, (4) and (5), we have
′
′
′
(Q ) ∀(α≥ θ(Tσa U)) θTσa U ⊏
−
− ∀(α≥ θ(τ )) θTσa′ U (7). By (6), we have θ(τ ′ ) ∈ Ii . Hence, by iEqu-Inert applied
⊐
to (5), we have (Q′ ) ∀(α ≥ θ(τ ′ )) θTσa′ U ⊏
−
− (θ(Tσa′ U)[θ(τ ′ )/α], i.e. (Q′ ) ∀(α ≥ θ(τ ′ )) θTσa′ U ⊏
⊐
−
− θ(Tσa′ U[τ ′ /α]) (8).
⊐
We conclude by (8), (7), (4) and transitivity.
Subcase σb ∈ V: we assume σb ≡ β. By induction hypothesis, we have (Q′ ) θ(Tσa′ U)[θ(β)/α] ⊏
−
−
⊐
′
θ(Tσb U)[θ(β)/α]. From (3), we have (Q′ ) θTσa U ⊏
−
− θ(β) (9). If σa ≡ γ, then (Q′ ) θTσa U ⊏
⊐
−
− θ(γ), and we get
⊐
/ V. We conclude
(Q′ ) θ(γ) ≡ θ(β) from (9). Then, we conclude by Lemma 3.3.11.ii (page 23). Otherwise, Tσa U ∈
by (9), iCon-AllLeft, iCon-AllRight, and iEqu-Inert, using Lemma 4.1.7.
◦ Case eEqu-Comm: This rule commutes two binders. Each one is either flexible or rigid. Because of
symmetry, we only have to consider three subcases: either both bindings are rigid, or both are flexible, or one
is flexible and one is rigid. The first subcase is shown by commutation of the two substitutions. The second
subcase is shown by Rule iEqu-Comm. The last subcase is by reflexivity.
◦ Case eEqu-Var: We distinguish two subcases, depending on the binding being flexible or rigid. If it is
flexible, we use iEqu-Var. Otherwise, we use reflexivity.
◦ Case eEqu-Free: Similarly, we use iEqu-Free if the binding is flexible. Otherwise, we use reflexivity.
◦ Case eEqu-Mono: We use iEqu-Inert if the binding is flexible. Otherwise, we use reflexivity.
As for the abstraction relation (statement ii), we show the property for both relations ⊏
− and ⊏
−♯ , simultane♯
′
ously by induction on the derivation. That is, if (Q) σ1 ⊏
− σ2 or (Q) σ1 ⊏
− σ2 , then (Q) θTσ1 U ⊏
−
− θTσ2 U. Tran⊐
sitivity is by induction hypothesis. Rule eAbs-SharpLeft : shown as above, like for equivalence. Rule eAbsEquiv : by consequence of property i. Rule eAbs-Hyp : by reflexivity. Rule eAbs-SharpDrop : by induction
hypothesis.
◦ Case eAbs-Left : σ1 is of the form ∀(α ≥ σ1′ ) σ ′ and σ2 is ∀(α ≥ σ2′ ) σ ′ . By hypothesis, (Q) σ1′ ⊏
−♯ σ2′ (10)
′
′
′
′
holds. If σ1 or σ2 is in V, then (Q) σ1 ≡ σ2 holds by Lemma 4.1.5, so we get (Q) σ1 ≡ σ2 by congruence, and

INRIA

Recasting MLF

59

we conclude by property i. We assume now that neither σ1′ nor σ2′ are in V. Then, Tσ1 U is ∀(α ≥ Tσ1 U) Tσ ′ U
and Tσ2 U is ∀(α ≥ Tσ2 U) Tσ ′ U. We conclude by induction hypothesis and (10).
◦ Case eEqu-Inert : σ1 is ∀(α ≥ σ) σ ′ and σ2 is ∀(α ⇒ σ) σ ′ . By hypothesis, σ is inert in eMLF. As a
consequence, TσU is inert in iMLF(this is an easy consequence of the definition). Hence, we get the expected
result by iEqu-Inert.
The instance relation (statement iii) is shown similarly. Transitivity is by induction hypothesis. Flexiblecongruence is shown as above (see the equivalence case), using iIns-Subst if the right-hand side is in V.
eIns-Abstract is a consequence of ii and iIns-Equiv. eIns-Bot is shown with iIns-Bot. eIns-Hyp is shown
with iIns-Hyp. Finally, eIns-Rigid is shown with iIns-Subst, using Lemma 4.1.9 (page 33).

Proof of Lemma 4.1.12
By structural induction on σ. Both cases ⊥ and β (with β 6= α) are immediate. We remind that ≡ is a
subrelation of ⊏
−♯ .
◦ Case σ = α. Assume (α ≥ σ ′ ) ∈ Q with (∅) Vσ ′ W (⊏
−♯ ∪ ⊐
−♯ )∗ Vτ W (1) and τ ∈ Ii . We have to show
♯
♯ ∗
(VQW) α (⊏
− ∪⊐
− ) Vτ W (2). By eAbs-Hyp, we get (VQW) α ⊐
− Vσ ′ W. We conclude by (1).
◦ Case σ = τ1 → τ2 is by induction hypothesis and eAbs-SharpLeft.
◦ Case σ = ∀(α ≥ σ1 ) σ2 is by induction hypothesis and eAbs-Left.

Proof of Lemma 4.1.14
i) is shown by induction on the derivation of (Q) σ1 ⊏
−
− σ2 . Reflexivity, transitivity, and symmetry are immediate
⊐
by definition of (⊏
−♯ ∪ ⊐
−♯ )∗ .
◦ Case iEqu-Comm: by Rule eEqu-Comm.
◦ Case iEqu-Free: by Rule eEqu-Free.
◦ Case iEqu-Inert: by Lemma 4.1.12 and induction hypothesis.
◦ Case iEqu-Var: by Rule eEqu-Var.
Congruence of ⊏
−
− is defined by rules iCon-AllLeft, iCon-AllRight, and iCon-Arrow:
⊐
◦ Case iCon-AllLeft: by induction hypothesis and Rule eAbs-Left.
◦ Case iCon-AllRight: σ1 is of the form ∀(α ≥ σ) σ1′ and σ2 is of the form ∀(α ≥ σ) σ2′ . The premise is
(Q, α ≥ σ) σ1′ ⊏
−
− σ2′ . By induction hypothesis, we get (VQW, α ⋄ VσW) Vσ1′ W (⊏
⊐
−♯ ∪ ⊐
−♯ )∗ Vσ2′ W, where the binding
of α is rigid if σ is equivalent to an inert type τ , and flexible otherwise. By Rule eCon-AllRight, we get
(VQW) ∀(α⋄VσW) Vσ1′ W (⊏
−♯ ∪ ⊐
−♯ )∗ ∀(α⋄VσW) Vσ2′ W (1). If σ is not equivalent to a monotype, this is the expected
result. Otherwise, (∅) σ ⊏
−
− τ holds and we derive (VQW) ∀(α ⇒ VσW) Vσ1′ W (⊏
⊐
−♯ ∪ ⊐
−♯ )∗ ∀(α ⇒ Vτ W) Vσ1′ W by
′
induction hypothesis and eAbs-SharpLeft. Additionally, (VQW) ∀(α ⇒Vτ W) Vσ1 W (⊏
−♯ ∪ ⊐
−♯ )∗ ∀(α ≥ Vτ W) Vσ1′ W
hold by eEqu-Inert. We conclude by doing the same derivation for the right-hand side of (1) and transitivity.
◦ Case iCon-Arrow: σ1 is τ1 → τ1′ and σ2 is τ2 → τ2′ . By hypothesis, both (Q) τ1 ⊏
−
− τ2 and (Q) τ1′ ⊏
⊐
−
− τ2′
⊐
♯
♯ ∗
′
♯
hold, and so by induction hypothesis, we get both (VQW) Vτ1 W (⊏
− ∪⊐
− ) Vτ2 W (2) and (VQW) Vτ1 W (⊏
− ∪⊐
−♯ )∗
′
′
′
′
′
Vτ2 W (3). by definition, Vτ1 → τ1 W is ∀(α1 ⇒ Vτ1 W, α1 ⇒ Vτ1 W) α1 → α1 . by Rule eAbs-Left, (2) and (3), we get
(VQW) Vτ1 → τ1′ W (⊏
−♯ ∪ ⊐
−♯ )∗ ∀(α1 ⇒Vτ2 W, α′1 ⇒Vτ2′ W) α1 → α′1 , that is, (VQW) Vτ1 → τ1′ W (⊏
−♯ ∪ ⊐
−♯ )∗ Vτ2 → τ2′ W,
which is the expected result.
ii) is shown by induction on the derivation of (Q) σ1 ≤ σ2 . Transitivity is by definition of (⊑ ∪ ⊐
−)∗ .
◦ Case iIns-Equiv: by property i), and rules eAbs-SharpDrop and eIns-Abstract.
◦ Case iIns-Bot: by eIns-Bot
◦ Case iIns-Hyp: by eIns-Hyp, eAbs-Hyp and eAbs-SharpLeft.
◦ Case iIns-Subst: by eIns-Rigid and Lemma 4.1.13.
The ≥-congruence of ≤ is defined by the rules iCon-AllLeft and iCon-AllRight.
◦ Case iCon-AllLeft: by induction hypothesis and Rule eCon-FlexLeft.
◦ Case iCon-AllRight: similar to case iCon-AllRight above.

Proof of Theorem 3
By a simple induction on the typing derivation of (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ. The interesting cases are Annot and Inst,
which immediately follow from properties 4.1.11.ii (page 34) and 4.1.11.iii (page 34).

RR n° 6228

60

Rémy & Le Botlan

Proof of Theorem 4
The proof is constructive as it explicitly builds the translated term a′ . Thus, an algorithm that returns a′ given
a derivation of a could extracted from the proof. By induction on the derivation of iMLF :: (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ.
◦ Case Var: necessarily, a is a variable x such that x : σ belongs to Γ, and so x : VσW belongs to VΓW. We
conclude by Rule Var, taking a′ = x.
◦ Case Fun: a is of the form λ(x) b, σ is τ → τ ′ , and the premise is iMLF :: (Q) Γ, x : τ ⊢ b : τ ′ . By induction
hypothesis, there exists b′ (with type erasure b) such that eMLF :: (VQW) VΓW, x : Vτ W ⊢ b′ : Vτ ′ W (4) holds. Let
ᾱ be ftv(Vτ W) and a′ be λ(x : ∃ (ᾱ) Vτ W) b′ . We have
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

(VQW)
VΓW, x : Vτ W ⊢ b′ : ∀(α2 ⇒ Vτ ′ W) α2
′
(VQW, α2 ⇒ Vτ W) VΓW, x : Vτ W ⊢ b′ : α2
(VQW, α2 ⇒ Vτ ′ W) VΓW ⊢ a′ : ∀(α1 ⇒ Vτ W) α1 → α2
(VQW)
VΓW ⊢ a′ : ∀(α1 ⇒ Vτ W, α2 ⇒ Vτ ′ W) α1 → α2
(VQW)
VΓW ⊢ a′ : Vτ → τ ′ W

We get (5) by equivalence from (4) (Rule Inst and Rule eEqu-Var). We obtain (6) by Rule UnGen⋆ ,
and (7) by Rule Fun⋆ . By Rule Gen, we get (8), which is equal to the expected result (9).
◦ Case App: a is a1 a2 , and the premises are iMLF :: (Q) Γ ⊢ a1 : τ2 → τ1 (10) and iMLF :: (Q) Γ ⊢ a2 : τ2 (11),
where τ1 is σ. By induction hypothesis, there exist both a′1 and a′2 (with respective type erasures a1 and a2 ) such
that eMLF :: (VQW) VΓW ⊢ a′1 : ∀(α2 ⇒Vτ2 W) ∀(α1 ⇒Vτ1 W) α2 → α1 (12) and eMLF :: (VQW) VΓW ⊢ a′2 : Vτ2 W. The
latter can as well be written (VQW) VΓW ⊢ a′2 : ∀(α2 ⇒Vτ2 W) α2 by equivalence (Rule Inst and Rule eEqu-Var).
We conclude by Rule App⋆ take a′1 a′2 for a′ .
◦ Case Inst: The premises are iMLF :: (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ ′ (13) and (Q) σ ′ ≤ σ (14). By induction hypothesis,
−)∗ VσW
there exists a0 such that eMLF :: (VQW) VΓW ⊢ a0 : Vσ ′ W. By Lemma 4.1.14.ii and (14), (VQW) Vσ ′ W (⊑ ∪ ⊐
′
holds, that is, there exist a sequence σ0 , σ1 , . . . , σn , with σ0 = Vσ W and σn = VσW, such that (VQW) σi ⊑ σi+1
if i is even, and (VQW) σi ⊐
− σi+1 if i is odd. We show by induction on i, for i ⩽ n, that there exists ai with
type erasure a, such that (VQW) VΓW ⊢ ai : σi (15). Then, the expected result (VQW) VΓW ⊢ a′ : VσW is obtained
with i = n − 1 and a′ = an−1 . The judgment (15) holds for i = 0, as shown above. By induction hypothesis,
we assume it holds for some i < n. If i is even, we get judgment (15) for i + 1 using Rule Inst. If i is odd,
we get judgment (15) for i + 1 using Rule Annot, taking ai+1 = (ai : σi+1 ). In fact, the sequence of instance
and annot could be rearranged into a single instance followed by a single annotation, as (⩽ ∪ ⊐
−)∗ ⊂ (⩽ ◦ ⊐
−).
However, a proof of this commutation lemma, which has been done in the graphical presentation, would be very
tedious, syntactically.
◦ Case Gen: The premise is iMLF :: (Q, α≥σ1 ) Γ ⊢ a : σ2 , with α ∈
/ ftv(Γ), and σ is ∀(α≥σ1 ) σ2 . By induction
hypothesis, there exists a′′ such that eMLF :: (VQ, α≥σ1 W) VΓW ⊢ a′′ : Vσ2 W (16). Let ∀(Q1 ) σ1′ be Vσ1 W, with Q1
rigid and as large as possible. Then (16) is (VQW, Q1 , α ≥ σ1′ ) VΓW ⊢ a′′ : Vσ2 W. We notice that the domain of Q1
can be chosen disjoint from ftv(Γ). By repeated uses of Rule Gen, we get (VQW) VΓW ⊢ a′′ : ∀(Q1 , α ≥ σ1′ ) Vσ2 W.
Since (VQW) ∀(Q1 , α ≥ σ1′ ) Vσ2 W ⊐
− ∀(α ≥ ∀(Q1 ) σ1′ ) Vσ2 W holds by eCon-AllRight, eAbs-Left, and repeated
uses of eAbs-Hyp, we conclude by Rule Annot, taking a′ = (a′′ : VσW).
◦ Case Let: by induction hypothesis and Rule Let.

Proof of Lemma 4.3.7
This is a particular case of the following result, taking P , P ′ , and P ′′ empty. In the following, P ′ may be an
empty prefix or a prefix starting with an unconstrained binding. Similarly for P ′′ . Also, P and Q must be rigid
(Q is indeed rigid in the Lemma, since it is returned under an empty input prefix).
(P P ′ ) hhtii : (P QP ′′ , α)
P QQ′ P ′′ well-formed
(P QQ′ P ′ ) hhtii : (P QQ′ P ′′ , α)
This is shown by structural induction on t.

INRIA

Recasting MLF

61

Proof of Lemma 4.3.9
To lighten the notation in this proof and subsequent ones, we let Q mean dom(Q) and α mean {α} when a set
of variables is non-ambiguously expected from context. For example, given a set of variables J, a variable α,
and a prefix Q, we may write J ∪ α for J ∪ {α}, J \ α for J \ {α}, J ∪ Q for J ∪ dom(Q), J ∪ (Q1 ∩ Q2 ) for
J ∪ (dom(Q1 ) ∩ dom(Q2 )), and α ∩ Q for {α} ∩ dom(Q).
This lemma is a simplification of the invariant stated further, making also use of the following result, which
is shown by structural induction on t (we omit its proof)
Assume (Q) hhtii : (Q′ , α) holds. Let γ be outside ftv(t) ∪ dom(Q′ ). Then, (Qγ) hhtii : (Q′ γ, α) holds.
Lemma 4.3.9 is not strong enough to be proved directly. Instead, we consider the following huge much
stronger invariant, (we recover the Lemma by taking P , P1′ , P2′ empty, I = ftv(t) and using the previous short
result to introduce the unconstrained binding (α) in prefixes).
Assume Q1 rigid, Q1 ≡I Q2 , ftv(P ) ⊆ I ∪ α, and dom(Q′i αPi′ ) ∩ I = dom(Qi αP ) ∩ I for i = 1, 2.
Assume, moreover, that one of the following set of condition holds:
ftv(σ) ⊆ I ∪ αP

Q1 αP α1 σ = (Q′1 αP1′ , α1 )

Q2 αP α2 σ = (Q′2 αP2′ , α2 )

ftv(t) ⊆ I ∪ αP

(Q1 αP ) hhtii : (Q′1 αP1′ , α1 )

(Q2 αP ) hhtii : (Q′2 αP2′ , α2 )

or

Then, there exists a set J and a renaming φ such that
dom(φ) # I ∪ αP

I ∪ (α1 ∩ Q′1 ) ⊆ J

Q′1 ≡J φ(Q′2 )

φ(α2 ) = α1

φ(P2′ ) = P1′

ftv(P1′ ) ⊆ J ∪ α
We show the result for each of the two sets of conditions separately. The first result is shown by induction on
Q1 ≡I Q2 . The second result is shown by structural induction on t.
First result: Instead of showing ftv(P1′ ) ⊆ J ∪ α (last predicate), we show ftv(P1′ ) ⊆ I ∪ α, which is stronger.
Also, the hypothesis dom(Q′i αPi′ ) ∩ I = dom(Qi αPi ) ∩ I is equivalent to αi ∈
/ dom(Qi Pi ) =⇒ αi ∈
/ I.
◦ Case Reflexivity: We have Q1 = Q2 . Let J be I ∪ (α1 ∩ Q′1 ). If α1 = α2 , we take φ = id. Otherwise, let
φ be the renaming of domain {α1 , α2 } that swaps α1 and α2 . The binding (α1 ⇒ σ) is inserted in Q1 or in
P . In both cases, φ(Q′2 ) = Q′1 and φ(P2′ ) = P1′ hold. The former implies Q′1 ≡J φ(Q′2 ) by reflexivity. Also,
ftv(P1′ ) ⊆ ftv(P ) ∪ ftv(σ) − dom(P ) which implies ftv(P1′ ) ⊆ I ∪ α.
◦ Case Transitivity: To ease readability (with respect to indices), we assume Q1 ≡I Q2 (1) and Q2 ≡I Q3 (2)
hold and we show the conclusion where the index 2 is replaced by 3. We take α2 such that Q2 αP α2 σ is defined
(it always exists). By renaming, we may also freely assume α2 ∈
/ dom(Q2 P2 ) =⇒ α2 ∈
/ I. The hypotheses are
ftv(P ) ⊆ I ∪ α (3)

ftv(σ) ⊆ I ∪ αP (4)

Q1 αP α1 σ = (Q′1 αP1′ , α1 )

Q2 αP α2 σ = (Q′2 αP2′ , α2 ) (5)

Q3 αP α3 σ = (Q′3 αP3′ , α3 ) (6)
By induction hypothesis and (1), there exist J1 and φ1 such that
dom(φ1 ) # I ∪ αP (7)

I ∪ (α1 ∩ Q′1 ) ⊆ J1 (8)
φ1 (P2′ ) = P1′ (11)

Q′1 ≡J1 φ1 (Q′2 ) (9)

φ1 (α2 ) = α1 (10)

ftv(P1′ ) ⊆ I ∪ α (12)

Note that (7), (3), and (4) imply φ1 (P ) = P and φ1 (σ) = σ. From (2), we get φ1 (Q2 ) ≡I φ1 (Q3 ). From (5)
and (6), we get the following:
φ1 (Q2 )αP φ1 (α2 ) σ = (φ1 (Q′2 )αφ1 (P2′ ), φ1 (α2 ))
RR n° 6228

φ1 (Q3 )αP φ1 (α3 ) σ = (φ1 (Q′3 )αφ1 (P3′ ), φ1 (α3 ))

62

Rémy & Le Botlan

By (10) and (11), the former gives
φ1 (Q2 )αP α1 σ = (φ1 (Q′2 )αP1′ , α1 )
By induction hypothesis, there exist J2 and φ2 such that
φ1 (Q′2 ) ≡J2 φ2 ◦ φ1 (Q′3 ) (15)

I ∪ (α1 ∩ φ1 (Q′2 )) ⊆ J2 (14)

dom(φ2 ) # I ∪ αP (13)

φ2 ◦ φ1 (P3′ ) = P1′ (17)

φ2 ◦ φ1 (α3 ) = α1 (16)

Let φ be φ2 ◦ φ1 and J be J1 ∩ J2 . We have to show the following:
dom(φ) # I ∪ αP ∪ ftv(Q′3 ) (18)

I ∪ (α1 ∩ Q′1 ) ⊆ J (19)

φ(P3′ ) = P1′ (22)

Q′1 ≡J φ(Q′3 ) (20)

φ(α3 ) = α1 (21)

ftv(P1′ ) ⊆ I ∪ α (23)

We have (18) as a consequence of of (7) and (13). From (8) and (14), we have I ⊆ J1 ∩J2 . Also, if α1 ∈ dom(Q′1 ),
then α1 ∈ J1 from (8) and α1 ∈ dom(φ1 (Q′2 )) from (9). The latter implies α1 ∈ J2 from (14). Consequently, if
α1 ∈ Q′1 , then α1 ∈ J1 ∩ J2 . This implies (19).
We get (20) from (9) and (15). Also, (21) is (16), (22) is (17), and (23) is (12). This concludes the case.
◦ Case Symmetry: by induction hypothesis and by taking φ−1 (J) for J and φ−1 for φ.
◦ Case eSha-Comm: Similar to reflexivity.
◦ Case eSha-Free: By hypothesis, Q2 is (Q1 , β ⇒ σ ′ ) with β ∈
/ I ∪ dom(Q1 ) ∪ ftv(Q1 ). Also, σ ′ ∈
/ bnds(Q1 ).
We consider two subcases:
Subcase σ 6= σ ′ : This case is similar to reflexivity. Noticeably, if α1 ∈ dom(Q′1 ), we get φ(Q′2 ) ≡ Q′1 by
eSha-Comm (commuting the bindings of α1 and β), instead of φ(Q′2 ) = Q′1 .
Subcase σ = σ ′ : Then, Q′1 is (Q1 , α1 ⇒ σ), Q′2 = Q2 and β = α2 . If α1 = β, then we take φ = id and
J = I ∪ α1 . Otherwise, φ is the renaming of domain {α1 , β} swapping α1 and β. In both cases, Q′1 ≡J φ(Q′2 )
is derivable by reflexivity.
Second result (by structural induction on t):
◦ Case β: Then, Q′1 = Q1 , Q′2 = Q2 , P1′ = P2′ = P , and α1 = α2 = β. We get the expected result by taking
J = I and φ = id.
◦ Case t1 → t2 : By hypothesis, we have ftv(t) ⊆ I ∪ αP (24) as well as
(Q1 αP ) hht1 ii : (Qa1 αP1a , αa1 ) (25)

(Q2 αP ) hht1 ii : (Qa2 αP2a , αa2 ) (26)

(Qa1 αP1a ) hht2 ii : (Qb1 αP1b , αb1 ) (27)

(Q′1 αP1′ , α1 ) = Qb1 αP1b α1 αa1 → αb1 (29)

(Qa2 αP2a ) hht2 ii : (Qb2 αP2b , αb2 ) (28)

(Q′2 αP2′ , α2 ) = Qb2 αP2b α2 αa2 → αb2 (30)
By induction hypothesis, (25) and (26), there exist a set J1 and a renaming φ1 such that
dom(φ1 ) # I ∪ αP (31)

I ∪ (αa1 ∩ Qa1 ) ⊆ J1

Qa1 ≡J1 φ1 (Qa2 ) (32)

φ1 (αa2 ) = αa1

φ1 (P2a ) = P1a

ftv(P1a ) ⊆ J1 ∪ α
Note that (31) and (24) imply φ1 (t) = t. By Lemma 4.3.5 (page 39) and (28), we get
(φ1 (Qa2 )αP1a ) hht2 ii : (φ1 (Qb2 )αφ1 (P2b ), φ1 (αb2 ))

INRIA

Recasting MLF

63

By induction hypothesis (taking J1 for I), (32) and (27), there exist a set J2 and a renaming φ2 such that
dom(φ2 ) # J1 ∪ αP1a

J1 ∪ (αb1 ∩ Qb1 ) ⊆ J2

Qb1 ≡J2 φ2 ◦ φ1 (Qb2 )

φ2 ◦ φ1 (αb2 ) = αb1

φ2 ◦ φ1 (P2b ) = P1b

ftv(P1b ) ⊆ J2 ∪ α
Let φ′ be φ2 ◦ φ1 . The results above can be rewritten like this:
dom(φ′ ) # I ∪ αP

Qb1 ≡J2 φ′ (Qb2 )

I ∪ (αb1 ∩ Qb1 ) ⊆ J2

φ′ (αb2 ) = αb1

φ′ (P2b ) = P1b

φ′ (αa2 ) = αa1

ftv(P1b ) ⊆ J2 ∪ α
By applying φ′ to (30), we get
(φ′ (Q′2 )αφ′ (P2′ ), φ′ (α2 )) = φ′ (Qb2 )αP1b φ′ (α2 ) αa1 → αb1
Then, by using the first result of the Lemma, there exists a set J and a renaming ψ such that
dom(ψ) # J2 ∪ αP1b

Q′1 ≡J ψ ◦ φ′ (Q′2 )

J2 ∪ (α1 ∩ Q′1 ) ⊆ J

ψ ◦ φ′ (α2 ) = α1

ψ ◦ φ′ (P2′ ) = P1′

φ(P2′ ) = P1′

ftv(P1′ ) ⊆ J ∪ α

ftv(P1′ ) ⊆ J ∪ α
Let φ be ψ ◦ φ′ . We get
dom(φ) # I ∪ αP

Q′1 ≡J φ(Q′2 )

I ∪ (α1 ∩ Q′1 ) ⊆ J

φ(α2 ) = α1

◦ Case ∀(β) t0 : By hypothesis, we have
(Q1 αP β) hht0 ii : (Qa1 αP1a βP1b , β1 ) (33)

(Q2 αP β) hht0 ii : (Qa2 αP2a βP2b , β2 ) (34)

(Q′1 αP1′ , α1 ) = Qa1 αP1a α1 ∀(βP1b ) β1 (35)

(Q′2 αP2′ , α2 ) = Qa2 αP2a α2 ∀(βP2b ) β2 (36)

By induction hypothesis, there exist a set J ′ and a renaming φ′ such that
dom(φ′ ) # I ∪ αP β

I ∪ (β1 ∩ Qa1 ) ⊆ J ′

′

Qa1 ≡J φ′ (Qa2 )

φ′ (β2 ) = β1

φ′ (P2a βP2b ) = P1a βP1b (37)

ftv(P1a βP1b ) ⊆ J ′ ∪ α (38)
Note that (37) implies both φ′ (P2a ) = P1a and φ′ (P2b ) = P1b . Additionally, (38) implies both ftv(P1a ) ⊆ J ′ ∪ α
and ftv(P1b ) ⊆ J ′ ∪ αβP1a . From (36), we have
(φ′ (Q′2 )αφ′ (P2′ ), φ′ (α2 )) = φ′ (Qa2 )αP1a φ′ (α2 ) φ′ (∀(βP2b ) β2 )
We note that φ′ (∀(βP2b ) β2 ) is an alpha-conversion of ∀(βφ′ (P2b )) φ′ (β2 ), that is ∀(βP1b ) β1 . By using the first
result of the lemma, there exists a set J and a renaming ψ such that
dom(ψ) # J ′ ∪ αP1a

J ′ ∪ (α1 ∩ Q′1 ) ⊆ J

Q′1 ≡J ψ ◦ φ′ (Q′2 )
ftv(P1′ ) ⊆ J ∪ α

RR n° 6228

ψ ◦ φ′ (α2 ) = α1

ψ ◦ φ′ (P2′ ) = P1′

64

Rémy & Le Botlan

Let φ be ψ ◦ φ′ . We have
dom(φ) # I ∪ αP

I ∪ (α1 ∩ Q′1 ) ⊆ J

Q′1 ≡J φ(Q′2 )

φ(α2 ) = α1

φ(P2′ ) = P1′

ftv(P1′ ) ⊆ J ∪ α

This is the expected result.

Proof of Corollary 4.3.10
In order to lighten the presentation, we use the notations defined in the proof of Lemma 4.3.9.
Let (Q′ , α′ ) be the translation of t under an empty prefix (formally, (∅) hhtii : (Q′ , α′ ) (1) holds). We show
below that, for any σ in hhtii, we have (Q) σ ≡ ∀(Q′ ) α′ (2) under any suitable Q. Indeed, we then have
∀(Q) σi ≡ ∀(Q′ ) α′ for i in {1, 2} and the result follows by symmetry and transitivity of ≡.
Let us show (2). Let I be ftv(t) and σ in hhtii. By hypothesis, there exist shared rigid prefixes Q1 and Q′1
such that:
σ = ∀(Q′1 ) α1 (3)

(Q1 ) hhtii : (Q′1 , α1 ) (4)

I # dom(Q1 ) (5)

Using (5) and eSha-Free repeatedly, one may derive ∅ ≡I Q1 . By Lemma 4.3.9 (page 40), there exist a set J
and a renaming φ such that
dom(φ) # I (6)

I ∪ α1 ⊆ J (7)

Q′1 ≡J φ(Q′ ) (8)

φ(α′ ) = α1

From (8), (7), and Lemma 4.3.8 (page 39), we get (Q) ∀(Q′1 ) α1 ≡ ∀(φ(Q′ )) α1 (9) under any suitable Q.
The left-hand type is σ. The right-hand term is ∀(φ(Q′ )) φ(α′ ), which is alpha-convertible to φ(∀(Q′ ) α′ ).
Noting that ftv(Q′ ) ⊆ I holds from (1), we get φ(∀(Q′ ) α′ ) = ∀(Q′ ) α′ from (6). Therefore, (9) can be written
(Q) σ ≡ ∀(Q′ ) α′ , which is the expected result (2).

Proof of Property 4.3.11
−
>φ Q2 .
Both properties are shown by induction on Q1 −

Proof of Lemma 4.3.12
Each property is shown separately.
−
> σ ′ (2) holds. There are
−
>φ Q′ (1) holds. Also, φ ◦ ψ(σ) −
P-i: By hypothesis, Q α′ σ is defined and ψ(Q) −
−
−
two subcases:
Subcase α′ ∈ dom(Q): Then, (α′ ⇒ σ) ∈ Q and Q α′ σ is Q. Therefore, (α′ ⇒ ψ(σ)) ∈ ψ(Q). From (1)
and (2), we get (φ(α′ ) ⇒ σ ′ ) ∈ Q′ . Consequently, Q′ φ(α′ ) σ ′ is defined and equals Q′ . This is the expected
result, taking φ′ = id.
Subcase α′ ∈
/ dom(Q): Let Q be Q0 α1 Q1 ..αn Qn with Q1 , .., Qn rigid. From (1), we know that Q′
−
>φi Q′i holds for all 0 ⩽ i ⩽ n. Besides,
equals Q′0 α1 Q′1 ..αn Q′n with Q′1 , .., Q′n rigid and φi−1 ◦ .. ◦ φ0 ◦ ψ(Qi ) −
φ = φn ◦ .. ◦ φ0 . Also, φ(α′ ) = α′ since dom(φ) ⊆ dom(Q).
Let i be the index corresponding to the insertion of (α′ ⇒σ). Then, Qα′ σ is Q0 α1 Q1 ..αi Qi , (α′ ⇒σ), ..αn Qn .
We distinguish two other subcases: either (γ ⇒ σ ′ ) ∈ Q′ for some γ or not. In the latter case, Q′ α′ σ ′ is
−
> (Q′i , α′ ⇒ σ ′ ).
defined and equals Q′0 α1 Q′1 ..αi Q′i , (α′ ⇒ σ ′ ), ..αn Q′n . We note that φi−1 ◦ .. ◦ φ0 ◦ ψ(Qi , α′ ⇒ σ) −
−
>φ Q′ α′ σ ′ . This is the expected result taking φ′ = id.
Therefore, ψ(Q α′ σ) −
We now consider the last remaining case, when (γ ⇒ σ ′ ) ∈ Q′ for some γ. Let φ′ be [γ/α′ ]. Then,
−
>φ′ ◦φ Q′ . This is the expected result since Q′ γ σ ′ is Q′ and γ equals φ′ ◦ φ(α′ ).
ψ(Q α′ σ) −
P-ii: by structural induction on t.
Subcase t = γ (with γ 6= β or γ = β): Then Q′1 = Q1 and α1 = γ. We conclude by taking Q′2 = Q2 ,
α2 = ψ(γ) and φ′ = id.
Subcase t1 → t2 : By hypothesis, (Q1 ) hhtii : (Q′1 , α1 ) holds. The premises are (Q1 ) hht1 ii : (Qa1 , αa1 ) (3)
and (Qa1 ) hht2 ii : (Qb1 , αb1 ) (4), and Q′1 is Qb1 α1 αa1 → αb1 . By induction hypothesis and (3), there exist Qa2 , αa2
and φa such that
(Q2 ) hhψ(t1 )ii : (Qa2 , αa2 ) (5)

−
>φa ◦φ Qa2
ψ(Qa1 ) −

φa ◦ φ ◦ ψ(αa1 ) = αa2
INRIA

Recasting MLF

65

By induction hypothesis and (4), there exist Qb2 , αb2 and φb such that
(Qa2 ) hhψ(t2 )ii : (Qb2 , αb2 ) (6)

−
>φb ◦φa ◦φ Qb2 (7)
ψ(Qb1 ) −

φb ◦ φa ◦ φ ◦ ψ(αb1 ) = αb2

−
> αa2 → αb2 holds.
We note that φb ◦ φa ◦ φ ◦ ψ(αa1 → αb1 ) equals αa2 → αb2 and so φb ◦ φa ◦ φ ◦ ψ(αa1 → αb1 ) −
−
c
c
−
>φc ◦φb ◦φa ◦φ
Thus, Property P-i and (7), imply that there exists φ such that dom(φ ) ⊆ {α1 } (8) and ψ(Q′1 ) −
−
Qb2 φc ◦φb ◦φa ◦φ(α1 ) αa2 → αb2 (9). Let φ′ be φc ◦ φb ◦ φa . Let Q′2 be Qb2 φ′ ◦φ(α1 ) αa2 → αb2 . From (5) and (6), we
−
>φ′ ◦φ Q′2 . Since α1 is
have (Q2 ) hhψ(t)ii : (Q′2 , α2 ) by taking α2 = φ′ ◦ φ(α1 ) (10). From (9), we have ψ(Q′1 ) −
−
′
not β, we have ψ(α1 ) = α1 which gives α2 = φ ◦ φ ◦ ψ(α1 ) from (10). This is the expected result.
Subcase ∀(γ) t′ : By hypothesis, (Q1 ) hhtii : (Q′1 , α1 ) holds. The premise is (Q1 γ) hht′ ii : (Qa1 γQb1 , δ) and
′
−
>φ Q2 γ holds. Thus, by induction hypothesis, there exist
Q1 is Qa1 α1 ∀(γQb1 ) δ. We observe that ψ(Q1 γ) −
−
Qa2 , Qb2 , δ ′ and φa such that
(Q2 γ) hhψ(t′ )ii : (Qa2 γQb2 , δ ′ ) (11)

−
>φa ◦φ Qa2 γQb2 (12)
ψ(Qa1 γQb1 ) −

φa ◦ φ ◦ ψ(δ) = δ ′ (13)

−
>φc Qb2
−
>φb ◦φ Qa2 (14) and φb ◦φ◦ψ(Qb1 ) −
We note that (12) implies that there exist φb and φc such that ψ(Qa1 ) −
b
c
b
a
c
b
b
b
−
> ∀(γQ2 ) φ ◦ φ ◦ φ ◦ ψ(δ) holds. Remarking
with φ = φ ◦ φ (15). As a consequence, φ ◦ φ ◦ ψ(∀(γQ1 ) δ) −
that φc ◦ φb ◦ φ ◦ ψ(δ) equals δ ′ from (13) and (15), we may use Property P-i with (14) which provides φd
−
>φd ◦φb ◦φ Qa2 φd ◦φb ◦φ(α1 ) ∀(γQb2 ) δ ′ . Let φ′ be φd ◦ φb , α2 be φ′ ◦ φ(α1 ) (16) and Q′2
such that ψ(Q′1 ) −
−
>φ′ ◦φ Q′2 , (Q2 ) hhψ(t)ii : (Q′2 , α2 ) (from (11) and (17)), and
be Qa2 α2 ∀(γQb2 ) δ ′ (17). We have ψ(Q′1 ) −
φ′ ◦ φ ◦ ψ(α1 ) = α2 (from (16) and noting that ψ(α1 ) = α1 ).
P-iii: Let θ be the substitution [t′ /β]. Property P-iii is a particular case of the following rule, taking P = ∅:
(∅) hht′ ii : (Q′ , α)
(Q′ P ) hhψ(t)ii : (Q′ P ′ , α′ )
(Q′ P ) hhθ(t)ii : (Q′ P ′ , α′ )
The proof is by structural induction on t.
◦ Case t = γ with γ 6= β: Then, P ′ = P and α′ = γ. The result is immediate.
◦ Case t = β: Then, ψ(t) is α and so P ′ is P and α′ is α. Using Lemma 4.3.7 (page 39), we have (Q′ P ) hht′ ii :
(Q′ P, α), which is the expected result.
◦ Case t1 → t2 : by induction hypothesis.
◦ Case ∀(γ) t1 : by induction hypothesis.

Proof of Lemma 4.3.13
By structural induction on t. We assume (Q1 βQ2 P ) hhtii : (Q′1 βQ′2 P ′ , α) holds (1).
◦ Case t is γ: In order for (1) to hold, α must be γ and Q1 βQ2 P must be Q′1 βQ′2 P ′ (exactly in the same
order). Hence Q′1 is Q1 and Q′2 is Q2 . We take Q′3 for Q3 .
◦ Case t is ta → tb : The premises of (1) are
(Q1 βQ2 P ) hhta ii : (Qa1 βQa2 P a , αa ) (2)

(Qa1 βQa2 P a ) hhtb ii : (Qb1 βQb2 P b , αb ) (3)

(Q′1 βQ′2 P ′ , α) = Qb1 βQb2 P b α αa → αb (4)
By induction hypothesis applied to (2) and (3), we get (Q3 P ) hhta ii : (Qa3 P a , αa ) with Qa1 Qa2 ≈ Qa3 and
(Qa3 P a ) hhtb ii : (Qb3 P b , αb ) with Qb1 Qb2 ≈ Qb3 . Let Q′′3 be Qb3 P b α αa → αb (5). We have (Q3 P ) hhtii : (Q′′3 , α).
It remains to show that Q′′3 is of the form Q′3 P ′ with Q′3 ≈ Q3 . If α ∈ dom(P ′ ), then Q′1 is Qb1 and Q′2 is
b
Q2 and α ∈
/ dom(Q′1 Q′2 ). It follows from (4) that α was inserted in at most one of Qb1 , Qb2 , or P b , and as left as
possible. If α was inserted in Qb1 or Qb2 , leaving P ′ equal to Pb then (5) would also insert α in Qb3 , leaving Pb
unchanged, hence Q′′3 is of the form Q′3 P ′ and Q′3 ≈ Q′1 Q′2 . Otherwise, α could not be inserted in Qb1 Qb2 and
was inserted in P b leading to P ′ . Thus (5) could not either insert α in Qb3 but in P ′ . Hence again, Q′′3 is of the
form Q′3 P ′ and Q′3 ≈ Q′1 Q′2 .
◦ Case t is ∀(γ) ta : For (1) to hold, we must have (Q′1 βQ′2 P ′ , α) equal to Qa1 βQa2 P a α ∀(γP b ) α′ and
(Q1 βQ2 P γ) hhta ii : (Qa1 βQa2 P a γP b , α′ ) (6) By induction hypothesis applied to (6), we get (Q3 P γ) hhta ii :
RR n° 6228

66

Rémy & Le Botlan

(Qa3 P a γP b , α′ ) with Qa1 Qa2 ≈ Qa3 . Let Q′3 P ′ be Qa3 P a α ∀(γP b ) α′ . It remains only to show that Q′3 ≈ Q′1 Q′2 .
This follows by a case analysis as in the previous case.

Proof of Theorem 5
By induction on F :: Γ′ ⊢ a : t (1). Let Γ be in hhΓ′ ii. Thanks to Corollary 4.3.10 (page 40) and Inst, it suffices
to show eMLF :: (Q) Γ ⊢ a′ : σ for one σ in hhtii instead of all of them. By default, we let typing judgment be
in eMLF.
◦ Case Var: a is x and (1) implies x : t ∈ Γ′ . Hence, x : σ ∈ Γ with σ ∈ hhtii. By Var, we have (Q) Γ ⊢ x : σ,
which is the expected result.
◦ Case App: a is a1 a2 and (1) implies F :: Γ′ ⊢ a1 : t2 → t (2) and F :: Γ′ ⊢ a2 : t2 (3). Let ∀(Q′ ) α be in
hht2 → tii. By definition, there exists a prefix Q0 such that (Q0 ) hht2 → tii : (Q′ , α) holds. The premises of this
judgment are (Q0 ) hht2 ii : (Q1 , α1 ) and (Q1 ) hhtii : (Q2 , α2 ) (4) with Q′ being Q2 α α1 → α2 (5)
By induction hypothesis and (2), there exists a′1 such that (Q) Γ ⊢ a′1 : ∀(Q′ ) α. We note from (5) that
(Q) ∀(Q′ ) α ≡ ∀(Q2 ) α1 → α2 holds by eEqu-Var. Thus, by Inst and eEqu-Var, we have (Q) Γ ⊢ a′1 : ∀(Q2 )
α1 → α2 (6).
By induction hypothesis and (3), there exists a′2 such that (Q) Γ ⊢ a′2 : ∀(Q1 ) α1 . Since Q1 ⊆ Q2 holds, we
have (Q) ∀(Q1 ) α1 ≡ ∀(Q2 ) α1 by eEqu-Free. Consequently, (Q) Γ ⊢ a′2 : ∀(Q2 ) α1 (7) holds by Inst.
From App⋆ (page 24), (6) and (7), we get (Q) Γ ⊢ a′1 a′2 : ∀(Q2 ) α2 . We conclude by taking a′ = a′1 a′2 and
noting that ∀(Q2 ) α2 ∈ hhtii holds from (4).
◦ Case Fun: a is λ(x) a1 , and (1) implies that t is t1 → t2 and F :: Γ′ , x : t1 ⊢ a1 : t2 (8) holds. Let ∀(Q′ ) α
be in hht1 → t2 ii. By definition, there exists Q0 such that (Q0 ) hht1 → t2 ii : (Q′ , α) holds. The premises are
(Q0 ) hht1 ii : (Q1 , α1 ) and (Q1 ) hht2 ii : (Q2 , α2 ) with Q′ being Q2  α1 → α2 (9).
By induction hypothesis and (8), there exists a′1 such that (QQ2 ) Γ, x : ∀(Q1 ) α1 ⊢ a′1 : ∀(Q2 ) α2 holds.
We may freely assume that dom(Q2 ) # ftv(Γ). Noting that (QQ2 ) ∀(Q2 ) α2 ⊑ α2 holds by Share⋆ , we derive
(QQ2 ) Γ, x : ∀(Q1 ) α1 ⊢ a′1 : α2 by Inst. Let a′ be λ(x : ∀(Q1 ) α1 ) a′1 . By Fun⋆ , we get (QQ2 ) Γ ⊢ a′ :
∀(β1 ⇒ ∀(Q1 ) α1 ) β1 → α2 . Using Gen, we get (Q) Γ ⊢ a′ : ∀(Q2 ) ∀(β1 ⇒ ∀(Q1 ) α1 ) β1 → α2 . We note that
Q1 ⊆ Q2 , hence (Q) ∀(Q1 ) α1 ≡ ∀(Q2 ) α1 (10) holds by eEqu-Free. Then, the following holds:
∀(Q2 ) ∀(β1 ⇒ ∀(Q1 ) α1 ) β1 → α2
≡ ∀(Q2 ) ∀(β1 ⇒ ∀(Q2 ) α1 ) β1 → α2 from (10)
− ∀(Q2 ) ∀(β1 ⇒ α1 ) β1 → α2
⊏
by Shift⋆
≡ ∀(Q2 ) α1 → α2
by eEqu-Mono
≡ ∀(Q′ ) α
from (9)
Thus, by Inst, we get (Q) Γ ⊢ a′ : ∀(Q′ ) α. This is the expected result.
◦ Case Gen: (1) implies that τ is of the form ∀(α) t′ with α ∈
/ ftv(Γ′ ) and F :: Γ′ ⊢ a : t′ (11). Let Q′ and α′
′
′
′
′
be such that (∅) hh∀(α) t ii : (Q , α ). The premise is (α) hht ii : (Q1 αQ2 , β) (12) and Q′ is Q1 α′ ∀(αQ2 ) β (13).
By Lemma 4.3.13 (page 41) and (12), there exists Q′3 such that (∅) hht′ ii : (Q3 , β) holds with Q3 ≈ Q1 Q2 (14).
Thus, by induction hypothesis and (11), there exists a′ such that (Qα) Γ ⊢ a′ : ∀(Q3 ) β holds. From (14),
we get (Qα) ∀(Q3 ) β ≡ ∀(Q1 Q2 ) β. Thus, (Qα) Γ ⊢ a′ : ∀(Q1 Q2 ) β holds by Inst. By Gen, we get
(Q) Γ ⊢ a′ : ∀(αQ1 Q2 ) β. By eEqu-Comm and Inst, we get (Q) Γ ⊢ a′ : ∀(Q1 αQ2 ) β. We get the expected
result by noting that (Q) ∀(Q′ ) α′ ≡ ∀(Q1 αQ2 ) β holds from (13).
◦ Case Inst: (1) implies that t is of the form t0 [t′ /β] and F :: Γ′ ⊢ a : ∀(β) t0 (15). Let (Q′ , α) be such that
(∅) hht′ ii : (Q′ , α) (16) and ftv(t) # dom(Q′ ) (17) hold. We may freely assume that β ∈
/ dom(Q′ ) ∪ ftv(Q′ ).
′
Let (Q0 , α0 ) be such that (Q ) hh∀(β) t0 ii : (Q0 , α0 ). The premise of this judgment is (Q′ β) hht0 ii :
(Q1 βQ2 , γ) (18) and Q0 is Q1 α0 ∀(βQ2 ) γ. By eEqu-Var, this implies (Q) ∀(Q0 ) α0 ≡ ∀(Q1 βQ2 ) γ (19).
By induction hypothesis and (15), there exists a′ such that (Q) Γ ⊢ a′ : ∀(Q0 ) α0 holds. From (19) and Inst,
we get (Q) Γ ⊢ a′ : ∀(Q1 βQ2 ) γ (20).
Let ψ be [α/β]. From (18), we have β ∈
/ dom(Q1 ) ∪ ftv(Q1 ). Therefore, ψ(Q1 ) = Q1 . Then, we derive the
following:
(Q) ∀(Q1 βQ2 ) γ
=
∀(Q1 ) ∀(β ≥ ⊥) ∀(Q2 ) γ by notation
⊑
∀(Q1 ) ∀(β ≥ α) ∀(Q2 ) γ by eIns-Bot and flexible congruence
≡
∀(Q1 ) ψ(∀(Q2 ) γ)
by eEqu-Mono and eEqu-Free
=
∀(ψ(Q1 Q2 )) ψ(γ)

Therefore, (Q) Γ ⊢ a′ : ∀(ψ(Q1 Q2 )) ψ(γ) (21) holds from (20) by Inst.

INRIA

Recasting MLF

67

−
>id Q′ holds. Additionally, ψ(Q′ ) = Q′ . Thus,
We know from (16) that Q′ is already shared, that is, Q′ −
′
′
−
>id Q holds.
ψ(Q ) −
From (18) and Lemma 4.3.13, there exists Q3 such that (Q′ ) hht0 ii : (Q′3 , γ) with Q′3 ≈ Q1 Q2 (22). Then,
by Property P-ii and (17), there exist Q′2 , α2 and φ′ such that
(Q′ ) hhψ(t0 )ii : (Q′2 , α2 ) (23)

−
>φ′ Q′2 (24)
ψ(Q3 ) −

φ′ ◦ ψ(γ) = α2 (25)

From (21), (22), and Inst, we get (Q) Γ ⊢ a′ : ∀(ψ(Q3 )) ψ(γ) (26). From (24) and Lemma 4.3.11.ii (page 40),
we have (Q) ∀(ψ(Q3 )) ψ(γ) ⊑ ∀(Q′2 ) φ′ ◦ ψ(γ). By (25), that is (Q) ∀(ψ(Q3 )) ψ(γ) ⊑ ∀(Q′2 ) α2 . Hence, we get
(Q) Γ ⊢ a′ : ∀(Q′2 ) α2 (27) by Inst and (26).
From (23) and P-iii, we get (Q′ ) hhtii : (Q′2 , α2 ), which implies ∀(Q′2 ) α2 ∈ hhtii and so (27) is the expected
result.

Proof of Property 4.4.2
Each property is proved by induction on the derivation. Properties i and iii are easy. As for ii, the case eAbsHyp is replaced by eIns-Hyp and congruence is replaced by flexible congruence. Finally, eIns-Rigid is replaced
by reflexivity (that is, by the equivalence relation).

Proof of Lemma 4.4.3
By induction on the derivation of (Q) Γ ⊢ a : σ. Case Var is immediate. Cases App, Fun and Let are by
induction hypothesis. Case Inst is by Property 4.4.2.iii (page 43). Case Gen: We have (Q) Γ ⊢ a : ∀(α ⋄ σ1 ) σ2 ,
and the premise is (Q, α ⋄ σ1 ) Γ ⊢ a : σ2 , with α ∈
/ ftv(Γ). Note that α ∈
/ ftv(flex (Γ)) either. By induction
hypothesis, (flex (Q), α ≥ flex (σ1 )) flex (Γ) ⊢ a : flex (σ2 ) holds. Hence, (flex (Q)) flex (Γ) ⊢ a : ∀(α ≥ flex
(σ1 )) flex (σ2 ) holds by Gen. By definition, this means (flex (Q)) flex (Γ) ⊢ a : flex (∀(α ⋄ σ1 ) σ2 ), which is the
expected result.

Proof of Property 4.4.6
Property i): It is a consequence of the following: If hhQii = (ᾱ, θ′ ) and dom(θ) # ᾱ ∪ dom(Q), then hhθ(Q)ii =
(ᾱ, θ ◦ θ′ ).
Property ii): As a preliminary result, we show the same property for equivalence, that is, if (Q) σ1 ≡ σ2 holds,
then θ(hhσ1 ii) and θ(hhσ2 ii) are equivalent in ML. The proof is by induction on the derivation of (Q) σ1 ≡ σ2 .
Transitivity is by induction hypothesis. Reflexivity and symmetry are immediate: the ML equivalence relation
is reflexive and symmetric. For congruence, the proof is similar to the one for the instance relation (see below).
It remains to consider the following cases:
◦ Case eEqu-Free: We may as well add or remove useless binders in an ML type scheme.
◦ Case eEqu-Comm: We may as well commute binders in an ML type scheme.
◦ Case eEqu-Var: By definition, hh∀(α ≥ σ) αii and hhσii are identical.
◦ Case eEqu-Mono: Then σ2 is of the form σ1 [τ /α] and the premise is (α ≥ τ ) ∈ Q. Hence, Q is of the form
(Q1 , α ≥ τ, Q2 ). Therefore, θ equals θ1 ◦ [τ /α] ◦ θ2 with θ1 and θ2 being the substitutions associated with Q1
and Q2 respectively. By well-formedness, ftv(τ ) # dom(θ2 ) and α ∈
/ dom(θ2 ). As a consequence, we also have
θ = θ ◦ [τ /α]. We have hhσ2 ii = hhσ1 ii[τ /α] from Property i). Then, θ(hhσ1 ii) = θ ◦ [τ /α](hhσ1 ii) = θ(hhσ2 ii). This
implies the expected result by reflexivity of ≤ML . The ends the proof for the case of equivalence.
The proof for the general case is by induction on the derivation of (Q) σ1 ⊑ σ2 . Transitivity is by induction
hypothesis and transitivity of the ≤ML . Rule eIns-Rigid cannot occur since it mentions a rigid binding, whereas
the derivation is assumed to be flexible.
◦ Case eIns-Bot: ∀(α) α ≤ML σ holds for any ML type σ.
◦ Case eIns-Hyp: We have (α≥ σ1 ) ∈ Q and σ2 is α. Let ∀(β̄) τ1 be hhσ1 ii and (ᾱ, θ) be hhQii. By definition of
hhQii, θ(α) = θ(τ1 ) (1). Besides, θ(∀(β̄) τ1 ) is ∀(β̄) θ(τ1 ) (2), and ∀(β̄) θ(τ1 ) ≤ML θ(τ1 ) (3) holds. By combining
(2), (3), and (1), we have θ(∀(β̄) τ1 ) ≤ML θ(α), as expected.
◦ Case eIns-Abstract: The premise is (Q) σ1 ⊏
− σ2 . Necessarily, we have (Q) σ1 ≡ σ2 (Rule eAbs-Equiv),
because other possible rules for abstraction mention rigid bindings. Then, we conclude using the preliminary
result.

RR n° 6228

68

Rémy & Le Botlan

◦ Case Flexible Congruence: We recall the congruence rule:
(Q) σ1 ⊑ σ2 (5)
(Q, α ≥ σ2 ) σ1′ ⊑ σ2′ (4)
(Q) ∀(α ≥ σ1 ) σ1′ ⊑ ∀(α ≥ σ2 ) σ2′
Keeping the notations of this rule, we have to show θ(hh∀(α ≥ σ1 ) σ1′ ii) ≤ML θ(hh∀(α ≥ σ2 ) σ2′ ii) (6). Let ∀(α¯1 ) τ1
be hhσ1 ii and ∀(α¯2 ) τ2 be hhσ2 ii. By induction hypothesis and (5), we have θ(∀(α¯1 ) τ1 ) ≤ML θ(∀(α¯2 ) τ2 ) (7)
Using the definition of hh·ii, we may rewrite (6) as follows:
θ(∀(α¯1 ) hhσ1′ ii[τ1 /α]) ≤ML θ(∀(α¯2 ) hhσ2′ ii[τ2 /α])
We show this result in two steps, as follows:
θ(∀(α¯1 ) hhσ1′ ii[τ1 /α]) ≤ML θ(∀(α¯2 ) hhσ1′ ii[τ2 /α]) (8)

θ(∀(α¯2 ) hhσ1′ ii[τ2 /α]) ≤ML θ(∀(α¯2 ) hhσ2′ ii[τ2 /α]) (9)

The first step (8) is a consequence of Lemma 4.4.4 (page 43) and (7). The second step (9) is by induction
hypothesis applied to (4).

Proof of Lemma 4.4.7
By induction on the derivation. Case Var is immediate. Cases Fun, App, and Let are by induction hypothesis.
Case Inst is a direct consequence of Property 4.4.6.ii (page 43). Case Gen: The premise is (Q, α≥σ1 ) Γ ⊢ a : σ2 .
Let ∀(β̄) τ1 be hhσ1 ii (1), and θ1 be [τ1 /α] (2). We choose β̄ such that β̄ # ftv(Γ) (3). By definition, we have
hh(Q, α ≥ σ1 )ii = (ᾱβ̄, θ ◦ θ1 ). By induction hypothesis, we have θ ◦ θ1 (hhΓii) ⊢ a : θ ◦ θ1 (hhσ2 ii) in ML. Since
α∈
/ ftv(Γ), we have θ1 (hhΓii) = hhΓii. Hence, θ(hhΓii) ⊢ a : θ ◦ θ1 (hhσ2 ii) holds. From (3), we get by Rule Gen
of ML, θ(hhΓii) ⊢ a : ∀(β̄) θ ◦ θ1 (hhσ2 ii). Notice that ∀(β̄) θ ◦ θ1 (hhσ2 ii) is equal to θ(∀(β̄) θ1 (hhσ2 ii)), which, by
definition of hh·ii, (1), and (2) is also θ(hh∀(α ≥ σ1 ) σ2 ii). We thus have θ(hhΓii) ⊢ a : θ(hh∀(α ≥ σ1 ) σ2 ii), as
expected.

Proof of Theorem 9
Direct consequence of Lemmas 4.4.7 and 4.4.3.

References
Henk P. Barendregt. The Lambda Calculus: Its Syntax and Semantics. North-Holland, revised edition, 1984.
ISBN 0-444-86748-1.

⊲ H.-J. Boehm. Partial polymorphic type inference is undecidable. In 26th Annual Symposium on Foundations
of Computer Science, pages 339–345. IEEE Computer Society Press, October 1985. ISBN 0-8186-0644-4.

⊲ Luca Cardelli. An implementation of FSub. Research Report 97, Digital Equipment Corporation Systems
Research Center, 1993.

⊲ Sébastien Carlier, Jeff Polakow, J.B. Wells, and A.J. Kfoury. System e: Expansion variables for flexible typing
with linear and non-linear types and intersection types. In David A. Schmidt, editor, Prooceedings of the 13th
European Symposium on Programming., volume 2986 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 294–309.
Springer, 2004. ISBN 978-3-540-21313-0.

⊲ Gilles Dowek, Thérèse Hardin, Claude Kirchner, and Frank Pfenning. Higher-order unification via explicit
substitutions: the case of higher-order patterns. In M. Maher, editor, Joint international conference and
symposium on logic programming, pages 259–273, 1996.

⊲ Jacques Garrigue and Didier Rémy. Extending ML with Semi-Explicit higher-order polymorphism. Journal of
Functional Programming, vol 155, pages pages 134–169, 1999. A preliminary version appeared in TACS’97.

INRIA

Recasting MLF

69

⊲ P. Giannini and S. Ronchi Della Rocca. Characterization of typings in polymorphic type discipline. In Third
annual Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, pages 61–70. IEEE, 1988.
Jean-Yves Girard. Interprétation fonctionnelle et élimination des coupures de l’arithmétique d’ordre supérieur.
Thèse d’état, University of Paris VII, 1972.

⊲ Haruo Hosoya and Benjamin C. Pierce. How good is local type inference? Technical Report MS-CIS-99-17,
University of Pennsylvania, June 1999.

⊲ Trevor Jim. A polar type system. In ICALP Satellite Workshops, pages 323–338, 2000.
⊲ Trevor Jim. Rank-2 type systems and recursive definitions. Technical Report MIT-LCS-TM-531, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Laboratory for Computer Science, November 1995.

⊲ S.

Peyton Jones and M. Shields.
Lexically scoped type variables.
http://research.microsoft.com/∼simonpj/papers/scoped-tyvars, March 2004a.

Available

at

S. Peyton Jones and M. Shields. Practical type inference for arbitrary-rank types, 2004b.

⊲ A. J. Kfoury and J. B. Wells. A direct algorithm for type inference in the rank-2 fragment of the second-order
λ-calculus. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Lisp and functional programming, pages 196–207, June
1994.

⊲ Konstantin Läufer and Martin Odersky. Polymorphic type inference and abstract data types. ACM Transactions
on Programming Languages and Systems, 16(5):1411–1430, September 1994.

⊲ Didier Le Botlan. MLF : Une extension de ML avec polymorphisme de second ordre et instanciation implicite.
PhD thesis, Ecole Polytechnique, May 2004. 326 pages.

⊲ Didier Le Botlan and Didier Rémy. MLF: Raising ML to the power of System-F. In Proceedings of the Eighth
ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming, pages 27–38, August 2003.

⊲ Daan Leijen. A type directed translation of MLF to System F. In The International Conference on Functional
Programming (ICFP’07). ACM Press, October 2007.

⊲ Daan Leijen. HMF: Simple type inference for first-class polymorphism. In The 13th ACM symp. of the International Conference on Functional Programming (ICFP’08), Victoria BC, Canada, September 2008. Extended
version available as Microsoft Research technical report MSR-TR-2007-118, Sep 2007.
Daan Leijen. Flexible types: robust type inference for first-class polymorphism. In Proceedings of the 36th ACM
Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL’09), Savannah, Georgia, USA, January 2009.
To appear.

⊲ Daan Leijen and Andres Löh. Qualified types for MLF. In ICFP ’05: Proceedings of the tenth ACM SIGPLAN
international conference on Functional programming, pages 144–155, New York, NY, USA, September 2005.
ACM Press. ISBN 1-59593-064-7.
Daniel Leivant. Discrete polymorphism. In Proceedings of the 1990 ACM conference on LISP and functional
programming (LFP 90), pages 288–297, New York, NY, USA, 1990. ACM. ISBN 0-89791-368-X. doi: http:
//doi.acm.org/10.1145/91556.91675.

⊲ David McAllester. A logical algorithm for ML type inference. In Rewriting Techniques and Applications, 14th
International Conference (RTA 2003), volume 2706 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 436–451,
Valencia, Spain, June 2003. Springer-Verlag.

⊲ Dale Miller. Unification under a mixed prefix. Journal of Symbolic Computation, 14:321–358, 1992.
⊲ R. Milner. A theory of type polymorphism in programming. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 17:
348–375, December 1978.

⊲ John C. Mitchell. Polymorphic type inference and containment. Information and Computation, 2/3(76):211–249,
1988.

RR n° 6228

70

Rémy & Le Botlan

⊲ Martin Odersky and Konstantin Läufer. Putting type annotations to work. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM
Conference on Principles of Programming Languages, pages 54–67, January 1996.

⊲ Martin Odersky, Christoph Zenger, and Matthias Zenger. Colored local type inference. ACM SIGPLAN Notices,
36(3):41–53, March 2001.

⊲ James William O’Toole Jr. and David K. Gifford. Type reconstruction with first-class polymorphic values. In
SIGPLAN ’89 Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, Portland, Oregon, June
1989. ACM. also in ACM SIGPLAN Notices 24(7), July 1989.

⊲ Simon Peyton Jones, Dimitrios Vytiniotis, Stephanie Weirich, and Mark Shields. Practical type inference for
arbitrary-rank types. J. Funct. Program., 17(1):1–82, 2007. ISSN 0956-7968.

⊲ Frank Pfenning. Partial polymorphic type inference and higher-order unification. In Proceedings of the ACM
Conference on Lisp and Functional Programming, pages 153–163. ACM Press, July 1988.
Frank Pfenning. On the undecidability of partial polymorphic type reconstruction. Fundamenta Informaticae, 19
(1,2):185–199, 1993. Preliminary version available as Technical Report CMU-CS-92-105, School of Computer
Science, Carnegie Mellon University, January 1992.

⊲ Benjamin C. Pierce. Types and Programming Languages. The MIT Press, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, 2002. ISBN 0-262-16209-1.

⊲ Benjamin C. Pierce. Bounded quantification is undecidable. Information and Computation, 112(1):131–165,
July 1994.

⊲ Benjamin C. Pierce. Programming with Intersection Types and Bounded Polymorphism. PhD thesis, Carnegie
Mellon University, December 1991. Available as School of Computer Science technical report CMU-CS-91-205.

⊲ Benjamin C. Pierce and David N. Turner. Local type inference. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst., 22(1):1–44,
2000.

⊲ François Pottier and Didier Rémy. The essence of ML type inference. In Benjamin C. Pierce, editor, Advanced
Topics in Types and Programming Languages, chapter 10, pages 389–489. MIT Press, 2005.

⊲ François Pottier and Yann Régis-Gianas. Stratified type inference for generalized algebraic data types. In
Proceedings of the 33rd ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL’06), pages 232–
244, Charleston, South Carolina, January 2006.

⊲ François Pottier and Didier Rémy. The essence of ML type inference. Extended preliminary version of (Pottier
and Rémy, 2005), 2003.

⊲ Didier Rémy. Simple, partial type-inference for System F based on type-containment. In Proceedings of the
tenth International Conference on Functional Programming, September 2005.

⊲ Didier Rémy. Programming objects with ML-ART: An extension to ML with abstract and record types. In
Masami Hagiya and John C. Mitchell, editors, Theoretical Aspects of Computer Software, volume 789 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 321–346. Springer-Verlag, April 1994.

⊲ Didier Rémy and Boris Yakobowski. A graphical presentation of MLF types with a linear-time unification
algorithm. In Proceedings of the 2007 ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on Types in Languages Design
and Implementation (TLDI’07), pages 27–38, Nice, France, January 2007. ACM Press. ISBN 1-59593-393-X.

⊲ Didier Rémy and Boris Yakobowski. From ML to MLF: Graphic type constraints with efficient type inference.
In The 13th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming (ICFP’08), pages 63–74,
Victoria, BC, Canada, September 2008a. doi: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1411203.1411216.

⊲ Didier Rémy and Boris Yakobowski.

A church-style intermediate language for MLF.
http://gallium.inria.fr/∼remy/mlf/xmlf.pdf, September 2008b.

Available at

⊲ John C. Reynolds. Towards a theory of type structure. In Proc. Colloque sur la Programmation, pages 408–425,
New York, 1974. Springer-Verlag LNCS 19.

INRIA

Recasting MLF

71

Aleksy Schubert. Second-order unification and type inference for Church-style polymorphism. In Conference
Record of POPL 98: The 25TH ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, San Diego, California, pages 279–288, New York, NY, 1998.

⊲ Dimitrios Vytiniotis, Stephanie Weirich, and Simon Peyton Jones. Boxy types: inference for higher-rank types
and impredicativity. In ICFP ’06: Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on
Functional Programming, pages 251–262, New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM Press. ISBN 1-59593-309-3.

⊲ Dimitrios Vytiniotis, Stephanie Weirich, and Simon Peyton Jones. FPH: First-class Polymorphism for Haskell.
In The 13th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming (ICFP’08), Victoria, BC,
Canada, September 2008. doi: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1411203.1411246.

⊲ J. B. Wells. The essence of principal typings. In Proc. 29th Int’l Coll. Automata, Languages, and Programming,
volume 2380 of LNCS, pages 913–925. Springer-Verlag, 2002. ISBN 3-540-43864-5.

⊲ J. B. Wells. Typability and type checking in System F are equivalent and undecidable. Annals of Pure Applied
Logic, 98(1–3):111–156, 1999.
Joe B. Wells. Type Inference for System F with and without the Eta Rule. PhD thesis, Boston University, 1996.

⊲ Boris Yakobowski. Graphical types and constraints: second-order polymorphism and inference. PhD thesis,
University of Paris 7, 2008. Draft.

RR n° 6228

Unité de recherche INRIA Rocquencourt
Domaine de Voluceau - Rocquencourt - BP 105 - 78153 Le Chesnay Cedex (France)
Unité de recherche INRIA Futurs : Parc Club Orsay Université - ZAC des Vignes
4, rue Jacques Monod - 91893 ORSAY Cedex (France)
Unité de recherche INRIA Lorraine : LORIA, Technopôle de Nancy-Brabois - Campus scientifique
615, rue du Jardin Botanique - BP 101 - 54602 Villers-lès-Nancy Cedex (France)
Unité de recherche INRIA Rennes : IRISA, Campus universitaire de Beaulieu - 35042 Rennes Cedex (France)
Unité de recherche INRIA Rhône-Alpes : 655, avenue de l’Europe - 38334 Montbonnot Saint-Ismier (France)
Unité de recherche INRIA Sophia Antipolis : 2004, route des Lucioles - BP 93 - 06902 Sophia Antipolis Cedex (France)

Éditeur
INRIA - Domaine de Voluceau - Rocquencourt, BP 105 - 78153 Le Chesnay Cedex (France)

http://www.inria.fr
ISSN 0249-6399

