A Church-Style Intermediate Language for MLF
Didier Rémy

Boris Yakobowski

October 27, 2009
Abstract
MLF is a type system that seamlessly merges ML-style implicit but
second-class polymorphism with System F explicit first-class polymorphism. We present x MLF, a Church-style version of MLF with full type
information that can easily be maintained during reduction. All parameters of functions are explicitly typed and both type abstraction and type
instantiation are explicit. However, type instantiation in x MLF is more
general than type application in System F. We equip x MLF with a smallstep reduction semantics that allows reduction in any context and show
that this relation is confluent and type preserving. We also show that both
subject reduction and progress hold for weak-reduction strategies, including call-by-value with the value-restriction. We exhibit a type preserving
encoding of MLF into x MLF, which ensures type soundness for the most
general version of MLF. We observe that x MLF is a calculus of retyping
functions at the type level.

Introduction
MLF (Le Botlan and Rémy 2003, 2007; Rémy and Yakobowski 2008) is a type
system that seamlessly merges ML-style implicit but second-class polymorphism
with System F explicit first-class polymorphism. This is done by enriching
System F types. Indeed, maybe surprisingly, System F is not well-suited for
partial type inference, as illustrated by the following example. Assume that a
function, say choice, of type ∀ (α) α → α → α and the identity function id,
of type ∀ (β) β → β, have been defined. How can the application choice to
id be typed in System F? Should choice be applied to the type ∀ (β) β → β
of the identity that is itself kept polymorphic? Or should it be applied to the
monomorphic type γ → γ, with the identity being applied to γ (where γ is
bound in a type abstraction in front of the application)? Unfortunately, these
alternatives have incompatible types, respectively (∀ (α) α → α) → (∀ (α) α →
α) and ∀ (γ) (γ → γ) → (γ → γ): none is an instance of the other. Hence, in
System F, one is forced to irreversibly choose between one of the two explicitly
typed terms.
However, a type inference system cannot choose between the two, as this
would sacrifice completeness and be somehow arbitrary. This is why MLF enriches types with instance-bounded polymorphism, which allows to write more
1

expressive types that factor out in a single type all typechecking alternatives
in such cases as the example of choice. Now, the type ∀ (α ⩾ τ ) α → α, which
should be read “α → α where α is any instance of τ ”, can be assigned to
choice id, and the two previous alternatives can be recovered a posteriori by
choosing different instances for α.
i MLF and eMLF Currently, the language MLF comes with a Curry-style version iMLF, where no type information is needed, and a type-inference version
eMLF, that requires partial type information (Le Botlan and Rémy 2007). However, eMLF is not quite in Church’s style, since a large amount of type information is still inferred, and partial type information cannot be easily maintained
during reduction. Hence, while eMLF is a good surface language, it is not a good
candidate for use as an internal language during the compilation process, where
some simple program transformations, and perhaps some reduction steps, are
being performed. This has been a problem for the adoption of MLF in the Haskell
community (Peyton Jones 2003), as the Haskell compilation chain uses an internal explicitly typed language, especially, but not only, for evidence translation
due to the use of qualified types (Jones 1994).
This is also an obstacle to proving subject reduction, which does not hold in
eMLF. In a way, this is unavoidable in a language with non-trivial partial type
inference. Indeed, type annotations cannot be completely dropped, but must at
least be transformed and reorganized during reduction. Still, one could expect
that eMLF may be equipped with reduction rules for type annotations. This
has actually been considered in the original presentation of MLF, but only with
limited success. The reduction kept track of annotation sites during reduction;
this showed, in particular, that no new annotation site needs to be introduced
during reduction. Unfortunately, the exact form of annotations could not be
maintained during reduction, by lack of an appropriate language to describe
their computation. As a result, it has only been shown that some type derivation can be rebuilt after the reduction of a well-typed program, but without
exhibiting an algorithm to compute them during reduction.
Independently, Rémy and Yakobowski (2008) have introduced graphic constraints, both to simplify the presentation of MLF and improve its type inference
algorithm. This also lead to a simpler, slightly more expressive definition of MLF.
x MLF In this paper, we present a Church-style version of MLF, called x MLF,
which contains full type information. In fact, type checking becomes a simple
and local verification process—by contrast with type inference in eMLF, which
is based on unification. In x MLF, type abstraction, type instantiation, and all
parameters of functions are explicit, as in System F. However, type instantiation
is more general and more atomic than type application in System F: we use
explicit type instantiation expressions, that are actually proof evidences for the
type instance relations in MLF.
In addition to the usual β-reduction, we give a series of reduction rules for
simplifying type instantiations. These rules are confluent when allowed in any

2

context. Moreover, reduction preserves typings, and is sufficient to reduce all
typable expressions to a value when used in either a call-by-value or call-by-name
setting. This establishes the soundness of MLF for a call-by-name semantics for
the first time. Notably, x MLF is a conservative extension of System F.
To verify that, as expected, x MLF can be used as an internal language for
eMLF, we exhibit a type-preserving type-erasure-preserving translation from
eMLF to x MLF. This translation is based on typing derivations and thus performed after type inference. Technically, it is based on presolutions of type
inference problems in the graphic constraint framework of MLF. An important corollary is the type soundness of eMLF—in its most expressive1 version
(Rémy and Yakobowski 2008). Therefore, x MLF could also be used as an internal language for (and ensure the type soundness of) HML—another less
expressive but simpler surface language for iMLF that has been recently proposed (Leijen 2009).
Besides these practical issues, x MLF might be interesting in its own right:
type instantiations change the types of terms in ways that have some similarities,
but also important differences, with retyping functions in the language Fη —the
closure of F by η-expansion. In particular, type instantiations operate entirely
at the level of types and not at the level of terms, hence, by construction, they
do not carry any computational content.
Outline Perhaps surprisingly, but quite interestingly. the difficulty in defining an internal language for MLF is not reflected in the internal language itself,
which, we believe, remains simple and easy to understand, but rather in the
translation from eMLF to x MLF, which is complicated by many administrative
details. Hence, we present x MLF first and study its meta-theoretical properties
independently of eMLF. More precisely, the paper is organized as follows. We
present x MLF, its syntax and its static and dynamic semantics in §1. We study
its main properties, including type soundness for different evaluations strategies in §2. The elaboration of eMLF programs into x MLF is addressed in §3.
We discuss possible improvements and variations, as well as related and future
works at the end of the paper §4. All proofs are omitted, but can be found in
(Yakobowski 2008, Chapters 14 & 15).

1

The calculus

1.1

Types, instantiations, terms, and typing environments

All the syntactic definitions of x MLF can be found in Figure 1. We assume given a
countable collection of variables ranged over by letters α, β, γ, and δ. As usual,
types include type variables and arrow types. Other type constructors will
be added later—straightforwardly, as the arrow constructor receives no special
treatment. Types also include a bottom type ⊥ that corresponds to the System F
1 So far, type-soundness has only been proved for the original, but slightly weaker variant of
MLF (Le Botlan 2004) and for the shallow, recast version of MLF (Le Botlan and Rémy 2007).

3

α, β, γ, δ
τ
::=
|
|
|
|
φ

::=
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|

x, y, z
a
::=
|
|
|
|
|
|
Γ

::=
|
|
|

Type variables
Types
Type variable
Arrow type
Flexible quantification
Bottom type

α
τ →τ
∀ (α ⩾ τ ) τ
⊥

1

Instantiations
Bottom
Abstract
Inside
Under
Quantifier elimination
Quantifier introduction
Composition
Identity

x
λ(x : τ ) a
aa
Λ(α ⩾ τ ) a
aφ
let x = a in a

Term variables
Terms
Variable
Function
Application
Type abstraction
Type instantiation
Let-binding

∅
Γ, α ⩾ τ
Γ, x : τ

Environments
Empty environment
Type variable
Term variable

τ
!α
∀ (⩾ φ)
∀ (α ⩾) φ
N
O
φ; φ

Figure 1: Grammar of types, instantiations, and terms
type ∀α.α. Finally, a type may also be a form of bounded quantification ∀ (α⩾τ )
τ ′ , called flexible quantification, that generalizes the ∀α.τ form of System F.
(We may simply write ∀ (α) τ ′ when the bound τ is ⊥.) Intuitively, ∀ (α ⩾ τ ) τ ′
restricts the variable α to range only over instances of τ . The variable α is
bound in τ ′ but not in τ .
In Church-style System F, type instantiation inside terms is simply type application, of the form a τ . By contrast, type instantiation a φ in x MLF details
every intermediate instantiation step, so that it can be checked locally. Intuitively, the instantiation φ transforms a type τ into another type τ ′ that is an
instance of τ . In a way, φ is a witness for the instance relation that holds between τ and τ ′ . It is therefore easier to understand instantiations altogether
with their static semantics, which will be explained in the next section.
Terms of x MLF are those of the λ-calculus enriched with let constructs, with

4

Inst-Bot
Γ⊢τ :⊥≤τ

Inst-Under
Γ, α ⩾ τ ⊢ φ : τ1 ≤ τ2
Γ ⊢ ∀ (α ⩾) φ : ∀ (α ⩾ τ ) τ1 ≤ ∀ (α ⩾ τ ) τ2

Inst-Inside
Γ ⊢ φ : τ1 ≤ τ2
Γ ⊢ ∀ (⩾ φ) : ∀ (α ⩾ τ1 ) τ ≤ ∀ (α ⩾ τ2 ) τ
Inst-Comp
Γ ⊢ φ1 : τ1 ≤ τ2
Γ ⊢ φ2 : τ2 ≤ τ3
Γ ⊢ φ1 ; φ2 : τ1 ≤ τ3

Inst-Abstr
α⩾τ ∈Γ
Γ ⊢ !α : τ ≤ α

Inst-Intro
α∈
/ ftv(τ )
Γ ⊢ O : τ ≤ ∀ (α ⩾ ⊥) τ

Inst-Elim

Inst-Id

Γ ⊢ N : ∀ (α ⩾ τ ) τ ′ ≤ τ ′ {α ← τ }

Γ⊢1:τ ≤τ

Figure 2: Type instance
two small differences. Type instantiation a φ generalizes System F type application. Type abstractions are extended with an instance bound τ and written
Λ(α ⩾ τ ) a. The type variable α is bound in a, but not in τ . We abbreviate Λ(α ⩾ ⊥) a as Λ(α) a, which simulates the type abstraction form Λα. a of
System F.
As usual, type environments assign types to program variables. However,
instead of just listing type variables, as is the case in System F, type variables
are also assigned a bound in a binding of the form α ⩾ τ .
As usual, we assume that typing environments do not bind twice the same
variable. We write dom(Γ) for the set of all term and type variables that are
bound by Γ. All the free type variables appearing in a type of the environment
Γ must be bound earlier in Γ. Formally, writing ftv(τ ) for the set of type
variables that appear free in τ , the relation ftv(τ ) ⊆ dom(Γ) must hold to
form environments Γ, α ⩾ τ, Γ′ and Γ, x : τ, Γ′ . All environments in this paper
implicitly verify both well-formedness hypotheses.
We identify types, instantiations, and terms up to the renaming of bound
variables. The capture-avoiding substitution of a variable v inside an expression
s by an expression s′ is written s{v ← s′ }.

1.2

Instantiations

Instantiations φ are defined in Figure 1. Their typing, described in Figure 2, are
type instance judgments of the form Γ ⊢ φ : τ ≤ τ ′ , stating that in environment
Γ, the instantiation φ transforms the type τ into the type τ ′ .
The bottom instantiation τ expresses that (any) type τ is an instance of the
bottom type. The abstract instantiation !α, which assumes that the hypothesis
α ⩾ τ is in the environment, abstracts the bound τ of α as the type variable
α. The inside instantiation ∀ (⩾ φ) applies φ to the bound τ ′ of a flexible
quantification ∀ (α′ ⩾τ ′ ) τ . Conversely, the under instantiation ∀ (α ⩾) φ applies
φ to the type τ under the quantification. The type variable α is bound in φ; the
environment in the premise of the rule Inst-Under is increased accordingly.
5

τ (!α) = α
⊥τ
τ O
τ (φ1 ; φ2 )
(∀ (α ⩾ τ ) τ ′ ) N
(∀ (α ⩾ τ ) τ ′ ) (∀ (⩾ φ))
(∀ (α ⩾ τ ) τ ′ ) (∀ (α ⩾) φ)

= τ
τ1=τ
= ∀ (α ⩾ ⊥) τ
α∈
/ ftv(τ )
= (τ φ1 ) φ2
= τ ′ {α ← τ }
= ∀ (α ⩾ τ φ) τ ′
= ∀ (α ⩾ τ ) (τ ′ φ)

Figure 3: Type instantiation (on types)
The quantifier introduction O2 introduces a fresh trivial quantification ∀ (α⩾⊥).
Conversely, the quantifier elimination N eliminates the bound of a type of the
form ∀ (α ⩾ τ ) τ ′ by substituting τ for α in τ ′ . This amounts to definitely
choosing the present bound τ for α, while the bound before the application
could be further instantiated by some inside instantiation. The composition
φ; φ′ witnesses the transitivity of type instance, while the identity instantiation
1 witnesses reflexivity.
Example Let τmin , τcmp , and τand be the types (for example, of the parametric
minimum and comparison functions and the conjunction of boolean formulas)
defined as follows:
τmin , ∀ (α ⩾ ⊥) α → α → α
τcmp , ∀ (α ⩾ ⊥) α → α → bool
τand , bool → bool → bool
Let φ be the instantiation ∀ (⩾ bool); N. Then, ⊢ φ : τmin ≤ τand and ⊢ φ :
τcmp ≤ τand hold. Let τK be the type ∀ (α ⩾ ⊥) ∀ (β ⩾ ⊥) α → β → α (e.g. of
the λ-term λ(x) λ(y) x) and φ′ be the instantiation3 ∀ (α ⩾) (∀ (⩾ α); N). Then,
φ′ : τK ≤ τmin .
Type application As above, we often instantiate a quantification over ⊥
and immediately substitute the result. Moreover, this pattern corresponds to
the System-F unique instantiation form. Therefore, we define hτ i as syntactic
sugar for (∀ (⩾ τ ); N). The instantiations φ and φ′ can then be abbreviated
as hbooli and ∀ (α ⩾) hαi. More generally, we write hφi for the computation
(∀ (⩾ φ); N).
Properties of instantiations Since instantiations make all steps in the instance relation explicit, their typing is deterministic.
Lemma 1 If Γ ⊢ φ : τ ≤ τ1 and Γ′ ⊢ φ : τ ≤ τ2 , then τ1 = τ2 .
2 The choice of O is only by symmetry with the elimination form N described next, and
has no connection at all with linear logic.
3 Notice that the occurrence of α in the inside instantiation is bound by the under instantiation.

6

Var
x:τ ∈Γ
Γ⊢x:τ

Let
Γ⊢a:τ
Γ, x : τ ⊢ a′ : τ ′
Γ ⊢ let x = a in a′ : τ ′

App
Γ ⊢ a1 : τ2 → τ1
Γ ⊢ a2 : τ2
Γ ⊢ a1 a2 : τ1

Abs
Γ, x : τ ⊢ a : τ ′
Γ ⊢ λ(x : τ ) a : τ → τ ′

TAbs
Γ, α ⩾ τ ′ ⊢ a : τ
α∈
/ ftv(Γ)
′
Γ ⊢ Λ(α ⩾ τ ) a : ∀ (α ⩾ τ ′ ) τ

TApp
Γ⊢a:τ
Γ ⊢ φ : τ ≤ τ′
Γ ⊢ a φ : τ′
Figure 4: Typing rules for x MLF
The use of Γ′ instead of Γ may be surprising. However, Γ does not contribute to
the instance relation, except in the side condition of rule Inst-Abstr. Hence,
the type instance relation defines a partial function, called type instantiation 4 ,
that given an instantiation φ and a type τ , returns (if it exists) the unique type
τ φ such that ⊢ φ : τ ≤ τ φ. An inductive definition of this function is given in
Figure 3. Type instantiation is complete for type instance:
Lemma 2 If Γ ⊢ φ : τ ≤ τ ′ , then τ φ = τ ′ .
However, the fact that τ φ may be defined and equal to τ ′ does not imply that
Γ ⊢ φ : τ ≤ τ ′ holds for some Γ. Indeed, type instantiation does not check the
premise of rule Inst-Abstr. This is intentional, as it avoids parametrizing type
instantiation over the type environment. This means that type instantiation is
not sound in general. This is never a problem, however, since we only use type
instantiation originating from well-typed terms for which there always exists
some context Γ such that Γ ⊢ φ : τ ≤ τ ′ .
We say that types τ and τ ′ are equivalent in Γ if there exist φ and φ′
such that Γ ⊢ φ : τ ≤ τ ′ and Γ ⊢ φ′ : τ ′ ≤ τ . Although types of x MLF
are syntactically the same as the types of iMLF—the Curry-style version of
MLF (Le Botlan and Rémy 2007)—they are richer, because type equivalence in
x MLF is finer than type equivalence in iMLF, as will be explained in Section 4.1.

1.3

Typing rules for x MLF

Typing rules are defined in Figure 4. Compared with System F, the novelties are,
unsurprisingly, type abstraction and type instantiation. The typing of a type
abstraction Λ(α ⩾ τ ) a extends the typing environment with the type variable
α bound by τ . The typing of a type instantiation a φ resembles the typing of
a coercion, as it just requires the instantiation φ to transform the type of a to
the type of the result. Of course, it has the full power of the type application
rule of System F. For example, the type instantiation a hτ i has type τ ′ {α ← τ }
4 There should never be any ambiguity with the operation a φ on expressions; moreover,
both operations have strong similarities

7

(λ(x : τ ) a1 ) a2
let x = a2 in a1

−→ a1 {x ← a2 }
−→ a1 {x ← a2 }

(β)
(βlet )

a1
a (φ; φ′ )
aO

−→ a
(ι-Id)
−→ a φ (φ′ )
(ι-Seq)
−→ Λ(α ⩾ ⊥) a
α∈
/ ftv(τ )
(ι-Intro)
(Λ(α ⩾ τ ) a) N
−→ a{!α ← 1}{α ← τ } (ι-Elim)
(Λ(α ⩾ τ ) a) (∀ (α ⩾) φ) −→ Λ(α ⩾ τ ) (a φ)
(ι-Under)
(Λ(α ⩾ τ ) a) (∀ (⩾ φ)) −→ Λ(α ⩾ τ φ)
a{!α ← φ; !α} (ι-Inside)
E[a] −→ E[a′ ]

if a −→ a′

(Context)

Figure 5: Reduction rules
provided the term a has type ∀ (α) τ . As in System F, a well-typed closed term
has a unique type—in fact, a unique typing derivation.
A let-binding let x = a1 in a2 cannot entirely be treated as an abstraction
for an immediate application (λ(x : τ1 ) a2 ) a1 because the former does not
require a type annotation on x whereas the latter does. This is nothing new,
and the same as in System F extended with let-bindings. (Notice however that
τ1 , which is the type of a1 , is fully determined by a1 and could be synthesized
by a typechecker.)
Example Let id stand for the identity Λ(α ⩾ ⊥) λ(x : α) x and τid for the
type ∀ (α ⩾ ⊥) α → α. We have ⊢ id : τid . The function choice mentioned
in the introduction, may be defined as Λ(β ⩾ ⊥) λ(x : β) λ(y : β) x. It has
type ∀ (β ⩾ ⊥) β → β → β. The application of choice to id, which we refer
to below as choice id, may be defined as Λ(β ⩾ τid ) choice hβi (id (!β)) and has
type ∀ (β ⩾ τid ) β → β. The term choice id may also be given weaker types by
type instantiation. For example, choice id N has type (∀ (α ⩾ ⊥) α → α) →
(∀ (α ⩾ ⊥) α → α) as in System F, while choice id (O; ∀ (γ ⩾) (∀ (⩾ hγi); N)) has
the ML type ∀ (γ ⩾ ⊥) (γ → γ) → γ → γ.

1.4

Reduction

The semantics of the calculus is given by a small-step reduction semantics. We
let reduction occur in any context, including under abstractions. That is, the
evaluation contexts are all single-hole contexts, given by the grammar:
E

::=
|

[ · ] | E φ | λ(x : τ ) E | Λ(α ⩾ τ ) E
E a | a E | let x = E in a | let x = a in E

The reduction rules are described in Figure 5. As usual, basic reduction steps
contain β-reduction, with the two variants (β) and (βlet ). Other basic reduction
rules, related to the reduction of type instantiations and called ι-steps, are
8

described below. The one-step reduction is closed under the context rule. We
write −→β and −→ι for the two subrelations of −→ that contains only Context
and β-steps or ι-step, respectively. Finally, the reduction is the reflexive and
transitive closure −→
→ of the one-step reduction relation.
Reduction of type instantiation Type instantiation redexes are all of the
form a φ. The first three rules do not constrain the form of a. The identity type
instantiation is just dropped (Rule ι-Id). A type instantiation composition
is replaced by the successive corresponding type instantiations (Rule ι-Seq).
Rule ι-Intro introduces a new type abstraction in front of a; we assume that
the bound variable α is fresh in a. The other three rules require the type
instantiation to be applied to a type abstraction Λ(α ⩾ τ ) a. Rule ι-Under
propagates the type instantiation under the bound, inside the body a. By
contrast, Rule ι-Inside propagates the type instantiation φ inside the bound,
replacing τ by τ φ. However, as the bound of α has changed, the domain of the
type instantiations !α is no more τ , but τ φ. Hence, in order to maintain welltypedness, all the occurrences of the instantiation !α in a must be simultaneously
replaced5 by the instantiation (φ; !α). For instance, if a is the term
Λ(α ⩾ τ ) λ(x : α → α) λ(y : ⊥) y (α → α) (z (!α))
then, the type instantiation a (∀ (⩾ φ)) reduces to:
Λ(α ⩾ τ φ) λ(x : α → α) λ(y : ⊥) y (α → α) (z (φ; !α))
Rule ι-Elim eliminates the type abstraction, replacing all the occurrences of α
inside a by the bound τ . All the occurrences of !α inside τ (used to instantiate τ
into α) become vacuous and must be replaced by the identity instantiation. For
example, reusing the term a above, a N reduces to λ(x : τ → τ ) λ(y : ⊥) y (τ →
τ ) (z 1).
Notice that type instantiations a τ and a (!α) are irreducible.
Examples of reduction Let us reuse the term choice id defined in §1.3 as
Λ(β ⩾ τid ) choice hβi (id (!β)). Remember that hτ i stands for the System-F type
application τ and expands to (∀ (⩾ τ ); N). Therefore, the type instantiation
choice hβi reduces to the term λ(x : β) λ(y : β) x by ι-Seq, ι-Inside and ιElim. Hence, the term choice id reduces by these rules, Context, and (β) to
the expression Λ(β ⩾ τid ) λ(y : β) id (!β).
Below are three specialized versions of choice id (remember that ∀ (α) τ and
Λ(α) a are abbreviations for ∀ (α ⩾ ⊥) τ and Λ(α ⩾ ⊥) a). In this case, all
type instantiations are eliminated by reduction (but this not always the case in
5 Here, the instantiation !α is seen as atomic.

9

general).
choice id hhintii

: (int → int) → (int → int)
−→
→ λ(y : int → int) (λ(x : int) x)

choice id N

: (∀ (α) α → α) → (∀ (α) α → α)
−→
→ λ(y : ∀ (α) α → α) (Λ(α) λ(x : α) x)

choice id (O; ∀ (γ ⩾) (∀ (⩾ hγi); N))
: ∀ (γ) (γ → γ) → (γ → γ)
−→
→ Λ(γ) λ(y : γ → γ) (λ(x : γ) x)

1.5

System F as a subsystem of x MLF

System F can be seen as a subset of x MLF, using the following syntactic restrictions: all quantifications are of the form ∀ (α) τ and ⊥ is not a valid type
anymore (however, as in System F, ∀ (α) α is); all type abstractions are of the
form Λ(α) a; and all type instantiations are of the form a hτ i.
The derived typing rule for Λ(α) a and a hτ i are exactly the System-F
typing rules for type abstraction and type application. Hence, typechecking in
this restriction of x MLF corresponds to typechecking in System F.
Moreover, the reduction in this restriction also corresponds to reduction
in System F. Indeed, a reducible type application is necessarily of the form
(Λ(α) a) hτ i and can always be reduced to a{α ← τ } as follows:
(Λ(α) a) hτ i = (Λ(α ⩾ ⊥) a) (∀ (⩾ τ ); N)
−→ (Λ(α ⩾ ⊥) a) (∀ (⩾ τ )) (N)
−→ (Λ(α ⩾ ⊥τ ) a{!α ← τ ; !α}) (N)
= (Λ(α ⩾ τ ) a) (N)
−→ a{!α ← 1}{α ← τ }
= a{α ← τ }

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Step (1) is by definition; step (2) is by ι-Seq; step (3) is by ι-Inside, step (5)
is by ι-Elim and steps (4) and (6) by type instantiation and by assumption as
a is a term of System F, thus in which !α does not appear.

2

Properties of reduction

The reduction has been defined so that the type erasure of a reduction sequence
in x MLF is a reduction sequence in the untyped λ-calculus (Barendregt 1984).
Formally, the type erasure of a term a of x MLF is the untyped λ-term ⌈a⌉ defined
inductively by
⌈x⌉ = x
⌈a φ⌉ = ⌈a⌉
⌈a1 a2 ⌉ = ⌈a1 ⌉ ⌈a2 ⌉

⌈let x = a1 in a2 ⌉ = let x = ⌈a1 ⌉ in ⌈a2 ⌉
⌈λ(x : τ ) a⌉ = λ(x) ⌈a⌉
⌈Λ(α ⩾ τ ) a⌉ = ⌈a⌉

10

It is immediate to verify that two terms related by ι-reduction have the same
type erasure. Moreover, if a β-reduces to a′ , then the type erasure of a β-reduces
to the type erasure of a′ in one step in the untyped λ-calculus.

2.1

Subject reduction

In this section, we show that reduction of x MLF, which can occur in any context,
preserves typings. As usual, this relies on weakening and substitution lemmas,
which hold for both instance and typing judgments.
Lemma 3 (Weakening) Assume that Γ, Γ′ , Γ′′ is well-formed.
If Γ, Γ′′ ⊢ φ : τ1 ≤ τ2 , then Γ, Γ′ , Γ′′ ⊢ φ : τ1 ≤ τ2 .
If Γ, Γ′′ ⊢ a : τ ′ , then Γ, Γ′ , Γ′′ ⊢ a : τ ′ .
Lemma 4 (Term substitution) Assume that Γ ⊢ a′ : τ ′ holds.
If Γ, x : τ ′ , Γ′ ⊢ φ : τ1 ≤ τ2 then Γ, Γ′ ⊢ φ : τ1 ≤ τ2 .
If Γ, x : τ ′ , Γ′ ⊢ a : τ , then Γ, Γ′ ⊢ a{x ← a′ } : τ
The next lemma, which expresses that we can substitute an instance bound
inside judgments, ensures the correctness of Rule ι-Elim.
Lemma 5 (Bound substitution)
Let ϕ and θ be respectively the substitutions {α ← τ } and {!α ← 1}{α ← τ }.
If Γ, α ⩾ τ, Γ′ ⊢ φ : τ1 ≤ τ2 then Γ, Γ′ ϕ ⊢ φθ : τ1 ϕ ≤ τ2 ϕ.
If Γ, α ⩾ τ , Γ′ ⊢ a : τ ′ then Γ, Γ′ ϕ ⊢ aθ : τ ′ ϕ.
Finally, the following lemma ensures that an instance bound can be instantiated,
proving in turn the correctness of the rule ι-Inside.
Lemma 6 (Narrowing) Assume that Γ ⊢ φ : τ ≤ τ ′ holds. Let θ be {!α ←
φ; !α}.
If Γ, α ⩾ τ , Γ′ ⊢ φ′ : τ1 ≤ τ2 then Γ, α ⩾ τ ′ , Γ′ ⊢ φ′ θ : τ1 ≤ τ2 .
If Γ, α ⩾ τ, Γ′ ⊢ a : τ ′′ then Γ, α ⩾ τ ′ , Γ′ ⊢ aθ : τ ′′
Subject reduction is an easy consequence of all these results.
Theorem 1 (Subject reduction) If Γ ⊢ a : τ and a −→ a′ then, Γ ⊢ a′ : τ .

2.2

Confluence

As expected, reduction is confluent.
Theorem 2 The relation −→β is confluent. The relations −→ι and −→ are
confluent on the terms well-typed in some context.
This result is proved using the standard technique of parallel reductions
(Barendregt 1984). Thus β-reduction and ι-reduction are independent; this allows for instance to perform ι-reductions under λ-abstractions as far as possible
while keeping a weak evaluation strategy for β-reduction.
11

The restriction to well-typed terms for the confluence of ι-reduction is due
to two things. First, the rule ι-Inside is not applicable to ill-typed terms in
which τ φ cannot be computed (for example (Λ(α ⩾ int) a) N). Second, τ φ can
sometimes be computed, even though Γ ⊢ φ : τ ≤ τ ′ never holds (for example
if φ is !α and τ is not the bound of α in Γ). Hence, type errors may be either
revealed or silently reduced and perhaps eliminated, depending on the reduction
path. As an example, consider the term

Λ(α ⩾ ∀ (γ) γ) (Λ(β ⩾ int) x) (∀ (⩾ !α)) (∀ (⩾ N))

It is ill-typed in any context, because !α coerces a term of type ∀ (γ) γ into one
of type α, but !α is here indirectly applied to a term of type int. If we reduce
the outermost type instantiation first, we are stuck with Λ(α ⩾ ⊥) (Λ(β ⩾
int) x) (∀ (⩾ N; !α)) , which is irreducible since the type instantiation int (N; !α)
is undefined.
Conversely, if we reduce the innermost type instantiation first, the faulty
typeinstantiation disappears and we obtain the term Λ(α ⩾ ∀ (γ) γ) Λ(β ⩾
α) x (∀ (⩾ N)), which further reduces to the normal form Λ(α ⩾ ⊥) Λ(β ⩾ α) x.
The fact that ill-typed terms may not be confluent is not new: for instance,
this is already the case with η-reduction in System F. We believe this is not a
serious issue. In practice, this means that typechecking should be performed
before any program simplification, which is usually the case anyway.

2.3

Strong normalization

We conjecture, but have not checked, that all reduction sequences are finite in
x MLF.

2.4

Accommodating weak reduction strategies and constants

In order to show that the calculus may also be used as the core of a programming
language, we now introduce constants and restricts the semantics to a weak
evaluation strategy. We will show that subject reduction and progress hold
for the main two forms of weak-reduction strategies, namely call-by-value and
call-by-name.
We let the letter c range over constants. Each constant comes with its
arity |c|. The dynamic semantics of constants must be provided by primitive
reduction rules, called δ-rules. However, these are usually of a certain form.
To characterize δ-rules (and values), we partition constants into constructors
and primitives, ranged over by letters C and f , respectively. The difference
between the two lies in their semantics: primitives (such as +) are reduced when
fully applied, while constructors (such as cons) are irreducible and typically
eliminated when passed as argument to primitives.
In order to classify constructed values, we assume given a collection of type
constructors κ, together with their arities |κ|. We extend types with constructed
12

types κ (τ1 , . . . τ|κ| ). We write α for a sequence of variables α1 , . . . αk and ∀ (α) τ
for the type ∀ (α1 ) . . . ∀ (αk ) τ . The static semantics of constants is given by
an initial typing environment Γ0 that assigns to every constant c a type τ of
the form ∀ (α) τ1 → . . . τn → τ0 , where τ0 is a constructed type whenever the
constant c is a constructor.
We distinguish a subset of terms, called values and written v. Values are
term abstractions, type abstractions, full or partial applications of constructors,
or partial applications of primitives. We use an auxiliary letter w to characterize the arguments of functions, which differ for call-by-value and call-by-name
strategies. In values, an application of a constant c can involve a series of type
instantiations, but only evaluated ones and before all other arguments. Moreover, when c is a primitive the application may only be partial. Evaluated
instantiations θ may be quantifier eliminations or either inside or under (general) instantiations. In particular, a τ and a (!α) are never values. The grammar
for values and evaluated instantiations is as follows:
v

θ

::=
|
|
|
::=

λ(x : τ ) a
Λ(α : τ ) a
C θ1 . . . θk w1 . . . wn
f θ1 . . . θk w1 . . . wn
∀ (⩾ φ) | ∀ (α ⩾) φ | N

n ≤ |C|
n < |f |

Finally, we assume that δ-rules are of the form f θ1 . . . θk w1 . . . w|f | −→f a
(that is, δ-rules may only reduce fully applied primitives).
In addition to this general setting, we make further assumptions to relate
the static and dynamic semantics of constants.
Subject reduction: δ-reduction preserves typings. That is, for any typing
context Γ such that Γ ⊢ a : τ and a −→f a′ , the judgment Γ ⊢ a′ : τ holds.
Progress: Well-typed, full applications of primitives can be reduced. That is,
for any term a of the form f θ1 . . . θk w1 . . . wn verifying Γ0 ⊢ a : τ ,
there exists a term a′ such that a −→f a′ .
Call-by-value reduction We now specialize the previous framework to a
call-by-value semantics. In this case, arguments of applications in values are
themselves restricted to values, i.e. w is taken equal to v. Rules (β) and (βlet )
are limited to the substitution of values, that is, to reductions of the form
(λ(x : τ ) a) v −→ a{x ← v} and let x = v in a −→ a{x ← v}. Rules ι-Id,
ι-Comp and ι-Intro are also restricted so that they only apply to values (e.g.
a is textually replaced by v in each of these rules). Finally, we restrict rule
Context to call-by-value contexts, which are of the form
Ev ::= [ · ] | Ev a | v Ev | Ev φ | let x = Ev in a
We write −→
→v the resulting reduction relation. It follows from the above restrictions that the reduction is deterministic. Moreover, since δ-reduction is

13

supposed to preserve typings, it is immediate by Theorem 1 that −→
→v also
preserves typings.
Crucially, progress holds for call-by-value. In combination with subjectreduction, this ensures that the evaluation of well-typed terms “cannot go
wrong”.
Theorem 3 If Γ0 ⊢ a : τ , then either a is a value or there exists a′ such that
a −→
→v a′ .
Call-by-value reduction and the value restriction The valuerestriction (Wright and Felleisen 1994) is the most standard way to add side
effects in a call-by-value language. It is thus important to verify that it can be
transposed to x MLF.
Typically, the value restriction amounts to restricting type generalization
to non-expansive expressions, which contain at least value-forms, i.e. values
and term variables, as well as their type-instantiations. Hence, we obtain the
following (revised) grammar for expansive expressions b and for non-expansive
expressions u.
b
u

::=
::=
|
|

u | b b | let x = u in b
x | λ(x : τ ) b | Λ(α : τ ) u | u φ
C θ 1 . . . θk u 1 . . . u n
f θ 1 . . . θk u 1 . . . u n

n ≤ |C|
n < |f |

As usual, we restrict let-bound expressions to be non-expansive, since they implicitly contain a type generalization. Notice that, although type instantiations
are restricted to non-expansive expressions, this is not a limitation: b φ can always be written as (λ(x : τ ) x φ) b, where τ is the type of a, and similarly for
applications of constants to expansive expressions.
Theorem 4 Expansive and non-expansive expressions are closed by call-byvalue reduction.
Corollary 1 Subject reduction holds with the value restriction.
It is then routine work to extend the semantics with a global store to model
side effects and verify type soundness for this extension.

Call-by-name reduction
For call-by-name reduction semantics, we can actually increase the set of values,
which may now contain applications of constants to arbitrary expressions; that
is, we take a for w. The ι-reduction is restricted as for call-by-value. However,
evaluation contexts are now of the grammatical form: En ::= [ · ] | En a |
En φ. We write −→
→n the resulting reduction relation. As for call-by-value, it is
deterministic by definition and it preserves typings. It may also always progress.
Theorem 5 If Γ0 ⊢ a : τ , then either a is a value or there exists a′ such that
a −→
→n a′ .
14

σ0
→

σ2

→

σ1
→

→

χe

→

→

→

→

g
⊥

⊥

α

β

G

→

→

→

→

⊥

⊥

G

e

→

⊥
⊥

→

n
u

→

⊥

m
→

⊥

⊥

⊥

Figure 6: Types, constraints, and expansion

3

Elaboration of graphical eMLF into x MLF

In this section, we study the translation of the graphical version of eMLF
(Rémy and Yakobowski 2008; Yakobowski 2008) into x MLF. The graphical version of eMLF is more general than the syntactic versions, and better suited for
type inference; hence our choice. A full presentation of graphical eMLF is however out of the scope of this paper; we only remind the essential points in this
section.

3.1

An overview of graphical eMLF

Graphic types Types of graphical eMLF are graphs, designated with letter
σ, composed of the superposition of a term-dag, representing the structure of
the type, and of a binding tree encoding the binding information.
Term-dags are just dag representations of usual tree-like types, where at least
all occurrences of the same variable must be shared, and inner nodes representing
identical subtypes may also be shared. We write σ(n) for the constructor at
node n. Variables are anonymous, and represented by the pseudo-constructor
i
⊥. Term-dag edges are written n ◦−→
m, where i is an integer that ranges
between 1 and the arity of σ(n); we also use the notation hnii to designate m,
the root node being simply noted hi. In the drawings, edges are drawn with
plain lines, oriented downwards. We leave i implicit, as outgoing edges are
always drawn from left to right.
⋄
The binding tree is an upside-down tree with an edge n ≻−
→ m leaving from
each node n different from the root, and going to some node m (upper in the
term-dag) at which n is bound. Binding edges may be either flexible or rigid,
which is represented by labeling the edge with a flag ⋄ that is either ⩾ or =,
respectively. (On drawings, these flags are represented by dotted or dashed
lines, respectively.)
Example Consider the graphic type σ0 of Figure 6. The nodes h11i and
h22i are variables (names α and β are here to help reading the figure, but they
15

are not part of the graphic type). Paths 11 and 12 lead to the same node, which
⩾
can therefore be called h11i or h12i indifferently. The edge h22i ≻−
→ h2i is a
=
flexible binding edge (the rightmost lowermost one), while h1i ≻−
→ hi is a rigid
binding edge (the leftmost uppermost one) and h1i ◦−2→ h12i is a structure edge.
Binding edges express polymorphism. Typically, a rigid edge means that
polymorphism is required, as for example the type of an argument that is used
polymorphically. By contrast, a flexible edge means that polymorphism is available (as with flexible quantification in x MLF) but not required. For example,
σ0 is the type of a function whose argument must be at least as polymorphic
as ∀ (α) α → α, and whose result has type ∀ (β) β → β, or any instance of it.
In other words, if f is a function of type σ0 , the result of an application of f
can be used in place of the successor function of type int → int, but f cannot
be passed the successor function as argument.
Rigid bounds arise from type annotations: in the absence of type annotations (and types with rigid bounds in the typing environment), polymorphism
is offered, but is never requested, and the principal types of expressions only
use flexible bounds.
For the purpose of defining type instance, we distinguish four kinds of nodes.
Nodes on which no variable is transitively flexibly bound are called inert, as
they neither hold nor control polymorphism. All other nodes hold or control
polymorphism and are classified as follows. Nodes whose binding path is flexible
up to the root are called instantiable; they can be freely instantiated as described
next (in x MLF these nodes would correspond to parts of types that could be
transformed by a suitable instantiation expression). Nodes whose binding edge
is rigid are called restricted ; they can only be transformed in a restricted way
(in x MLF these nodes would correspond to polymorphic types occurring under
some arrow type). Nodes whose binding edge is flexible but whose binding
path up to the root contains a rigid edge are called locked ; they cannot be
transformed in any way (in x MLF these nodes would correspond to polymorphic
types occurring in the bound of quantifiers themselves under some arrow type
and not instantiation can transform them).
Type instance The instance relation on graphic types, written ⊑, is defined
as the composition of four atomic operations: grafting, merging, raising and
weakening. Grafting and merging are the usual instance transformations on
first-order term-dags and do not change the binding tree. Conversely, weakening
and raising only change the binding tree. Weakening transforms a flexible edge
into a rigid one. Raising lets one binding edge slide over another one. Moreover,
grafting is disallowed on restricted nodes and the four operations are disallowed
on locked nodes.
Example (continued) In σ1 , the node h2i is inert, h111i is locked, h21i
is instantiable and h1i is restricted. The graphic type σ2 is an instance of σ1 ,
obtained by raising the node h11i, grafting then weakening h22i, and finally
merging h11i and h21i.
16

J y K =(1) y

J z K =(2) /)(g) z (Φ(ez ))

J λ(y) b K =(3) /)(g) λ(y : S(y)) J b K (Φ(e))
J b1 b2 K =(4) /)(g) J b1 K (Φ(e1 )) (J b2 K (Φ(e2 )))
J let z = b1 in b2 K =(5) /)(g) let z = J b1 K in J b2 K (Φ(e2 ))
(3)

(2)

(1)
g y

(4)

g λ(y) b

n
→

uy

⊥

g b1 b2

g z
ez

b1

→

e1

⊥
⊥

(5)

y

b

e

⊥

b2 e
2

⊥

⊥

g let z = b1 in b2

b1

b2 e
2

⊥

Figure 7: Constraint generation and translation of presolutions
Type constraints Type constraints generalize graphic types by adding new
forms of edges, called constraint edges. These can be either unification edges
or instantiation edges
. Instantiation edges are oriented. They relate
special nodes, used to represent type schemes and called G-nodes, to regular
nodes. An example of a constraint χe is shown on the right-hand side of Figure 6.
The instance on type constraints is exactly as on graphic types—constraint
edges are just preserved.
A type constraint is solved when all of its constraint edges are solved. A
unification edge is solved when it relates a node to itself (thus, a unification
edge forces the nodes it relates to be merged). An instantiation edge e of the
form g
n of a constraint χ is solved when, informally, n is an instance of
the type scheme represented by g, or formally, when the expansion of e in χ is
an instance of χ, as described below.
A solved instance of a constraint is called a presolution. It still contains all
the nodes of the original constraint, many of which may have become irrelevant
for describing the resulting type. A solution of a constraint is, roughly, a presolution in which such nodes have been removed. We need not define solutions
formally since the translation uses presolutions directly.
n in a conExpansion Consider an instantiation edge e defined as g
straint χ. We define an expansion operation that enforces the constraint represented by e. The expansion of e in χ, written χe , is the constraint χ extended
with both a copy of the type scheme represented by g and a unification edge
between n and the root of the copy. The copy is bound at the same node as n.

17

Technically, we define the interior of g, written I(g) as all the nodes transitively
bound to g. The expansion operation copies all the nodes structurally strictly
under g and in the interior of g. Intuitively, those nodes are generic at the level
of g. Conversely, the nodes under g that are not in the interior of g are not
generic at the level of g and are not copied by the expansion (but are instead
shared with the original).6
By construction, an instantiation edge e is solved if and only if χ is an
instance of χe . We call instantiation witness an instance derivation of χe ⊑ χ
for a solved instantiation edge e.
Example Let us consider the expansion χe of Figure 6. The original constraint χ can be obtained from χe by removing the rightmost highlighted nodes,
as well as the resulting dangling edges. The interior of g is composed of the
nodes in the leftmost box. Hence the copied nodes are hg1i and hg11i, but not
hg12i, which is not in I(g). The root of the expansion m is the copy of hg1i. It
is bound to the binder of n and connected to n by the unification edge u.
In this example, χ is an instance of χe , as witnessed by the following operations: graft ∀ (α) ∀ (β) α → β under hm1i; raise hm11i twice, and merge it with
hn11i; weaken hm1i and m; finally, merge n and m. Hence, the edge e (and χ
itself) is solved.
From λ-terms to typing constraints Terms of eMLF are the partially annotated λ-terms generated by the following grammar
b ::= x | λ(x) b | λ(x : σ) b | b b | let x = b in b | (b : σ)
Source terms are translated into type constraints in a compositional manner.
Every occurrence of a subexpression b is associated to a distinct G-node in
the constraint, which we label with b for readability; however it should be understood that different occurrences of equal subexpressions b are mapped to
different nodes. We let y and z stand for λ-bound and let-bound variables,
respectively. Constraint generation is described on the bottom of Figure 7, for
the expressions described by the left-hand sides of the equalities at the top of
the figure. The unification edge uy in (1) is linked to its corresponding variable
node y generated in (3) by the translation of the abstraction binding y. The
instantiation edge ez in (2) is coming from the G-node labeled b1 generated in
(5) by the translation of the let expression binding z.
The constructions λ(x : σ) b and (b : σ) are actually syntactic sugar, for
λ(x) let x = κσ x in b and κσ b respectively, where κσ is a coercion function.
Both constructs are desugared before the translation into constraints.
Example The typing constraint χ for the term λ(x) λ(y) x is described on
the left-hand side of Figure 8. One of its presolutions χp is drawn on the middle
6 Readers familiar with (Rémy and Yakobowski 2008) may notice a slight change in terminology, as in this work we use the term “expansion” instead of “propagation”, and we solve
frontier unification edges on the fly.

18

χ λ(x) λ(y) x
→

→

λ(y) x

⊥

χep G

χp G

G

⊥

→

e

→

x
⊥

⊥

⊥

G

α

⊥

G

→

→

⊥

γ
⊥

→

β

⊥

→

→

⊥

⊥

G
⊥

Figure 8: Typing constraints for λ(x) λ(y) x.
(We have dropped the mapping of expressions to G-node for conciseness, and
labeled some binding edges that will appear in the x MLF translation.) Notice
that this is not the most general presolution, as the arrow nodes bound at Gnodes have been made rigid, but an equivalent rigid presolution, as explained
in §3.3, that is ready for translation into x MLF.
While type inference is out of the scope of this work—
see (Rémy and Yakobowski 2008), we may however easily check that χp
is indeed a presolution, i.e. that both instantiation edges are solved. Consider
for example the edge e. We must verify that χp is an instance of the expansion
χep drawn on the right-hand side, that is, exhibit a sequence of atomic instance
operations that transforms χep into χp . Here, the obvious solution is just to
merge the two nodes related by the unification edge.

3.2

An overview of the translation to x MLF

The translation of an eMLF term b to x MLF is based on a presolution χ of the
typing constraint for b. Typing constraints have principal presolutions. However, any presolution—not merely the principal one, which is the one returned
by type inference—can be translated. Since presolutions are instances of the
original constraint, and type instance preserves both G-nodes and instantiation
edges, we can refer to the original nodes and edges in Figure 7 when defining the translation. The translation is inductively defined on the structure of
terms, reading auxiliary information on the corresponding nodes in the presolution to build the type of function parameters, type abstractions, and type
instantiations. There are two key ingredients:
n, an instantiation Φ(e)
• For each instantiation edge e of the form g
is inserted to transform the type of the translation of the expression b
corresponding to g into the type of n. It can be computed from the proof
that e is solved in χ, i.e. from the instantiation witness for e. Details are
given in §3.4.

19

• For each flexible binding n ≻−
→ g, a type abstraction Λ(αn ⩾ τn ) is
inserted in front of the translation of the expression b corresponding to g,
τn being the type of the node n. Indeed, such an edge corresponds to some
polymorphism in n that must be introduced at the level of g. We use the
notation /)(g) to refer to all such quantifications at the level of g, which
will be precisely defined in §3.4. (Rigid bindings, which are only useful to
make type inference decidable, are inlined during the translation. Hence
they do not give rise to type quantifications.)
The translation is given in Figure 7. When b is a λ-bound variable y (1), its
translation is itself, as the G-node y is always monomorphic. For the other cases,
the translation is of the form /)(g) b′ , g being the G-node for b. Indeed, in MLF
and unlike in ML, generalization is as useful for applications and abstractions
as for let-bound expressions. A variable z (2) bound by some let z = b1 in
b2 expression is instantiated by Φ(ez ) to transform the type of [[b1 ]] into the
type of this occurrence of z, according to the edge ez . Correspondingly, in
the translation of let z = b1 in b2 (5), the translation of b1 is bound to z
uninstantiated, since each occurrence of z in [[b2 ]] will potentially pick a different
instance, while the translation of b2 is instantiated according to the edge e2 . In
the translation of an abstraction λ(y) b (3), we annotate y by its type in the
presolution (written S(y) and defined in §3.4) and coerce [[b]] to the its type inside
the abstraction according to the edge e. Finally, the translation of an application
(4) is the application of the translations, each of which is instantiated according
to its constraint edge.
The translation is type-erasure preserving by construction.
Lemma 7 Given a desugared term b, we have ⌈J b K⌉ = ⌈b⌉.
Example The presolution χp in Figure 8 is translated to the term Λ(α) Λ(β ⩾
∀ (δ) δ → α) λ(x : α) (Λ(γ) λ(y : γ) (x 1)) (!γ) which has type ∀ (α) ∀ (β ⩾ ∀ (δ)
δ → α) α → β. Notice the three type quantifications for α, β and γ that
correspond to the flexible edges of the same name. The instantiation !γ is the
translation of e.

3.3

From presolutions to rigid presolutions

Some presolutions are not suited for translation, for two reasons.
Firstly, the following nodes, which may be flexibly bound to a G-node, must
not result in a type quantification (as this would generate useless bindings, or
even incorrect ones):
1. the node hg1i in the translation of abstractions (3);
2. the node n in the translation of an application (4);
3. the node hg1i whenever bound on g;

20

4. any node bound on a G-node but not reachable from a G-node by following
only structure edges.
It is important that these nodes are retained and that their binding remain
flexible during type inference when some of the constraints might not have yet
been solved. However, their bindings may be made rigid after type inference,
i.e. in presolutions, without actually loosing any expressiveness, as we shall see
below. As a result, these nodes will be inlined during the translation into x MLF.
Secondly, type equivalence in eMLF is larger than in x MLF. Hence, some
instance operations allowed in eMLF do not have a counterpart in x MLF. In
particular, eMLF allows instance operations on inert nodes. However, when the
binding path of an inert node n contains a rigid binding, the translation of n
into x MLF cannot be instantiated in x MLF. Indeed, while type instantiation in
x MLF can operate under flexible bounds using inside-instantiations, rigid nodes
F. next, which is
of eML
are inlined
thusbinding
unreachable
in the
x ML
ForFexample,
theand
flexible
edge in
type
→
leaving from an inert node, may be weakened into eMLF, leading to
two equivalent types whose translations (∀ (α ⩾ int) α → α) → int
→
and (int → int) → int are not equivalent in x MLF (and actually
int
incomparable). Indeed, since type applications are explicit in x MLF,
a term of the former type must instantiate its argument before int
applying it, while a term of the latter type can apply its argument directly.
This is quite similar to the difference between the two System F types (∀ (α)
int → int) → int and (int → int) → int.
The difference in type equivalence does not mean that x MLF is less expressive than eMLF: inert nodes can always be weakened in presolutions of eMLF.
Moreover, we do not lose expressiveness by doing so, since this transformation
commutes with other operations used to solve presolutions.
We call rigid a presolution that respects the conditions given at the beginning
of this section and in which inert nodes are rigidly bound. The following lemma
ensures that rigid-presolutions can be used in place of presolutions without
affecting the set of solutions, up to weakening of inert nodes.
Lemma 8 Given a presolution χp of a constraint χ, there exists a rigid presolution χ′p of χ (derived from χp by weakening some nodes), in which terms have
the same types as in χ modulo the weakening of inert nodes.
This also suggests that we could have restricted ourselves to rigid presolution
in the first place, since principal presolutions can be turned into rigid ones in a
principal manner. However, rigid presolutions are only useful for the translation
of eMLF into x MLF and useless, if not harmful, for type inference purposes:
binding edges can only be rigidified—without loosing solutions—after all the
constraint edges under them have been solved. This imposes synchronization
in the constraint resolution. Therefore, we prefer to stay with the more flexible
definition of presolutions for eMLF (thus avoiding unnecessary complications in
the definition of eMLF, which is exposed to the user) and only consider rigid
presolution as a first step of the translation into x MLF.
In the remainder of this section, we abstract over a rigid presolution χ and
d.
an instantiation edge e of the form g
21

T(n) , ∀ (Q(n)) χ(n) (R(hn 1i), . . . R(hn pi))
where p is the arity of χ(n)

T(n)
if n is rigid
R(n) ,
αn
otherwise
Q(n) , (αhn1 i ⩾ T(n1 ) . . . αhnk i ⩾ T(nk ))
where n1 , . . . nk are all nodes flexibly bound to n, ordered

∀ (Q(n)) S(hn 1i) if n is a G-node
S(n) , αn
if n flexibly bound to a G-node

T(n)
otherwise
Figure 9: Mapping nodes of eMLF to types of eMLF

3.4

Details of the translation

Ordering binders and nodes In eMLF, two binding edges reaching the same
node are unordered. It is actually a useful property for type inference not to
distinguish between two types that just differ by the order of their quantifiers.
However, adjacent quantifiers do not commute in x MLF. While they could be
explicitly reordered by type instantiation, it is much better to get them in
the right order by construction as far as possible (as described below however,
reordering of quantifiers will still be necessary in some cases).
The simplest way to achieve this is to assume a total ordering ≺
of all nodes of χ.
Of course, ≺ cannot be arbitrary, as it should
also ensure the well-scopedness of syntactic types: if n ◦−→ n′ or
n′ ≻−
→ n, then n′ ≺ n must hold. We choose the leftmost-lowermost
ordering of nodes for ≺: if n1 , . . . , nk are bound to n, we first translate →
the ni which is lowest in the type, or leftmost if the ni are not ordered
⊥
⊥
by ◦−→. This means that the type next is always translated as ∀ (α)
∀ (β) α → β, not as ∀ (β) ∀ (α) α → β.
Translating types Every node of χ can be translated to an x MLF type. Moreover, the translation is unique when using the ordering of the previous section.
We follow the translation of eMLF types of (Yakobowski 2008), except for inert
nodes which are inlined.
Each node n of χ is mapped to a type S(n) of x MLF as described in Figure 9.
We assume that every node n in χ is in bijection with a type variable αn .
The translation uses the auxiliary functions Q(n) to build a sequence of type
quantifications (one for each node flexibly bound to n), R(n) to inline n when
it is rigid, and T(n) to build the bound of type variables in Q(n). The function
S(n) distinguishes two special cases: when n is a G-node, it is translated by
introducing the sequence of type quantifications Q(n) followed by the translation
of hn1i; when n is a regular node itself bound to a G-node, it is translated into
αn , which is always used in a context where αn is bound. Otherwise, S(n) is
T(n).

22

The notation /)(g)used in Figure 8 can now be defined as Λ(Q(g)) . We also
write S(χ) for the translation S(hi) of the root G-node of the whole constraint.
From instantiation witnesses to type instantiations The main part of
the translation is the computation of the type instantiations from the instantiation witnesses. Let r be the root node of the expansion in χe . By construction,
an instantiation witness Ω for e maps χe to χ. In fact, because Ω must leave χ
unchanged, the sequence Ω may be decomposed into subsequences of the form:
(1) Graft(σ, n) or Weaken(n) with n in I(r);
(2) Merge(n, m) with n and m in I(r), and m ≺ n;
+
(3) Raise(n) with n ≻−
→≻−
→ r;

(4) a sequence (Raise(n))k ; Merge(n, m), with n ∈ I(r) and m ∈
/ I(r). We
write this sequence RaiseMerge(n, m) and see it as an atomic operation.
An operation RaiseMerge(n, m) lets n leaves the interior of r and be merged
with some node m of χ bound above r. All other operations occur inside the
interior of r. The grouping of operations in RaiseMerge(n, m) helps translating
the subparts of instantiation witnesses that operate outside of I(r) into type
instantiations.
Furthermore, since χ is a rigid presolution, we may also assume that (5)
an operation Weaken(n) appears after all the other operations on a node below
n. This ensures that Ω does not perform any operation under a rigidly bound
node, which would not be expressible as an x MLF instantiation, as explained in
§3.3.
We call normalized an instantiation witness that verifies the conditions (1)–
(4) and (5) above. Normalized witnesses always exist. A constructive proof of
this fact is given in (Yakobowski 2008).
Instantiation contexts In order to relate graphic nodes and x MLF bounds,
we introduce one-hole instantiation contexts defined by the following grammar:
C ::= {·} | ∀ (⩾ C) | ∀ (α ⩾) C. We write C{φ} for the replacement of the hole by
the instantiation φ.
Consider a node n, and a node m flexibly transitively bound to n. Given our
n
use of ≺ to order nodes, there exists a unique instantiation context Cm
that can
be used to descend in front of the quantification corresponding to m in T(n).
For presolutions, and to avoid α-conversion related issues, we build instantiation
contexts using variables whose names are based on the nodes they traverse.
For example, consider the constraint χp in Figure 8. The translation T(hi) of
the root G-node is ∀ (α) ∀ (β ⩾ ∀ (δ) δ → α) α → β. With the convention above,
hi
hi
hi
we have Ch11i = {·}, Ch12i = ∀ (αh11i ⩾) {·} and Ch121i = ∀ (αh11i ⩾) ∀ (⩾ {·}).
Translating normalized derivations into instantiations Let us describe
the translation of a normalized witness of χe ⊑ χ into an x MLF instantiation.
We generalize the problem by translating a normalized witness Ω of ξ ⊑ χ
23

For a sequence of instructions:
Φξ () = 1
Φξ (ω; Ω′ ) = Φξ (ω); Φω(ξ) (Ω′ )
For an operation ω on a rigid node n:
Φξ (ω) =

1

For an operation on the flexible root of the expansion r:
Φξ (Graft(σ, r)) = T(σ)
Φξ (RaiseMerge(r, m)) = !αm
Φξ (Weaken(r)) = 1
For an operation on a flexible node different from the root:
Φξ (Graft(σ, n)) = Cnr {∀ (⩾ T(σ))}
Φξ (RaiseMerge(n, m)) = Cnr {h!αm i}
Φξ (Merge(n, m)) = Cnr {h!αm i}
Φξ (Weaken(n)) = Cnr {N}
r
{O; ∀ (⩾ Tξ (n));
Φξ (Raise(n)) = Cm
∀ (βn ⩾) Cnm {h!βn i}}
where m = min≺ {m | n ≻−
→≻−
→←−≺ m ∧ n ≺ m}
Figure 10: Translating normalized instance operations
where ξ is such that χe ⊑ ξ ⊑ χ. Inside χe and ξ, we let r be the root of the
expansion (inside χ, r is merged with d). The translation of ξ ⊑ χ must witness
the judgment Γd ⊢ Tξ (r) ≤ Tχ (r) where Γd is the typing context for the node d.
The translation of Ω, written Φξ (Ω), is defined by induction on Ω as described in
Figure 10. The function Φξ is overloaded to act on both an instance derivation
and a single operation.
The translation of an instance derivation is defined recursively: the translation of an empty derivation is the identity instantiation 1; otherwise, Ω is of
the form (ω; Ω′ ) and we return the composition of the translation of the operation ω followed by the translation of the instance derivation Ω′ applied to the
constraint ω(ξ).
The translation of an operation on a rigid node is the identity instantiation
1, as rigid bounds are inlined. Inert nodes have been weakened into rigid ones
and locked nodes do not allow instance. Hence, the remaining and interesting
part of the translation is a (single) operation applied to an instantiable node.
The translation of an instance operation on r (when r is flexible) is handled
especially, as follows. The grafting of a type σ is translated to the instantiation
τ —where τ is the translation of σ into x MLF. A raise-merge of r with m is
translated to !αn : it must be the last operation of the derivation Ω and αm
must be bound in the typing environment Γd ; hence we may abstract the type
of r under αm . The weakening of r is translated to 1: it must be the next-tothe-last operation in the derivation Ω, before the merging of r with a rigidly

24

bound node, and there is actually nothing to reflect in x MLF, as the type of r
itself is unchanged—only its binding flag in the expansion is.
In the remaining cases, the operation is applied to an instantiable node n.
Since the derivation is normalized and n is not rigid, n must be transitively
flexibly bound to r. Therefore, there exists an instantiation context Cnr to reach
the bound of αn in Tξ (r).
The grafting of a type σ at n is translated to
Cnr {∀ (⩾ T(σ))} that transforms the bound ⊥ of αn into T(σ). The merging of
n with a node m is translated to Cnr {h!αm i}, which first abstracts the bound
of αn under the name αm and immediately eliminates the quantification (we
assume m ≺ n). The translation is the same for a raise-merge, but αm is
bound in the typing environment instead of in Tξ (r). The weakening of n is
translated to Cnr {∀ (⩾ N)}. Finally, the translation of the raising of n is of the
r
form Cm
{O; ∀ (⩾ Tχ (n)); φ}. We first insert a fresh quantification, bound by
the type Tξ (n), inside Tξ (r). The difficulty consists in finding the node m in
front of which to insert this quantification, so as to respect the ordering between
bounds. Notice that the set {m | n ≻−
→≻−
→←−≺ m ∧ n ≺ m} contains at least
the bound of n, hence its minimum m is well-defined. Then, the instantiation
φ equal to ∀ (βn ⩾) Cnm {h!βn i} aliases the bound of n to the quantification just
introduced and eliminates the resulting quantification. The net result of the
whole type instantiation is that the type of n is introduced one level-higher
than it previously was.
Reordering quantifiers It remains to define the notation Φ(e) used
in Figure 7. We let Ω be a normalized witness for e. Unfortunately, g G
we cannot simply use Φχe (Ω), as, in some cases, the type Tχe (r) of
g in the expansion does not correspond to S(g), regardless of our use →
of ≺. This can easily be seen in the example next, in which S(g) is
⊥
∀ (β) ∀ (α) α → β: as we start by translating the flexible nodes bound⊥
on g, here hg12i, before translating hg1i; however, the expansion of g
has type ∀ (α) ∀ (β) α → β: the quantifiers appear in the opposite order. We
believe that this difficulty is actually inherent to elaborating terms for languages
with second-order polymorphism, in which second-order polymorphism can be
kept local (as here for hg11i), or be introduced by generalization (as for hg12i).
Thankfully, Tχe (r) and S(g) may differ only by a reordering of quantifiers. In
x MLF, we can explicitly reorder them through the use of instantiations such as

O; ∀ (⩾ τα ); O; ∀ (⩾ τβ ); ∀ (β ⩾) ∀ (α ⩾) h!αi; h!βi
which commutes α and β in the type ∀ (α ⩾ τα ) ∀ (β ⩾ τβ ) τ . We write Σ(g)
the instantiation that transforms S(g) into Tχe (r). Then, we define Φ(e) as
Σ(g); Φχe (Ω).

Translating annotated terms As mentioned in §3.1, expressions such as (b :
σ) and λ(y : σ) b are actually syntactic sugar, for κσ b and λ(y) let y = κσ y in b,
respectively. The translation T(κσ ) of the type of the coercion function κσ in
x MLF is ∀ (α ⩾ T(σ)) T(σ) → α. Interestingly, coercion functions need not be

25

primitive in x MLF—unlike in eMLF. Let idκ be the expression Λ(α) Λ(β⩾α) λ(x :
α) (x (!β)). Then, define κσ as idκ hT(σ)i. Notice that κσ behaves as the identity
function, as expected. Moreover, coercion functions can always be eliminated by
reduction after the elaboration of the presolution, so that they have no runtime
cost.

3.5

Soundness of the translation

Theorem 6 Let b be an eMLF term, χ a rigid presolution for b. The translation
J b K of χ is well-typed in xMLF, of type S(χ).
Our translation preserves the type-erasure of programs (Lemma 7). Hence, the
soundness of x MLF also implies the soundness of eMLF—which had previously
only been proved for the syntactic versions of MLF, but not for the most general,
graphical version.

4

Discussion

4.1

Expressiveness of x MLF

The elaboration of eMLF into x MLF shows that x MLF is at least as expressive
as eMLF. However, and perhaps surprisingly, the converse is not true. That
is, there exist programs of x MLF that cannot be typed in MLF. While, this is
mostly irrelevant when using MLF as an internal language for eMLF, the question
is still interesting from a theoretical point of view, as understanding x MLF on its
own, i.e. independently of the type inference constraints of eMLF, could perhaps
suggest other useful extensions of x MLF.
For the sake of simplicity, we explain the difference between x MLF and iMLF
the Curry-style version of MLF (which has the same expressiveness as eMLF).
Although syntactically identical, the types of x MLF and of syntactic iMLF differ
in their interpretation of alias bounds, i.e. quantifications of the form ∀ (β⩾α) τ .
Consider, for example, the two types τ0 and τid defined as ∀ (α ⩾ τ ) ∀ (β ⩾ α)
β → α and ∀ (α ⩾ τ ) α → α. In iMLF, alias bounds can be expanded and τ0
and τid are equivalent. Roughly, the set of their instances (stripped of toplevel
quantifiers) is {τ ′ → τ ′ | τ ≤ τ ′ }. In contrast, the set of instances of τ0 is
larger in x MLF and at least a superset of {τ ′′ → τ ′ | τ ≤ τ ′ ≤ τ ′′ }. This level
of generality cannot be expressed in iMLF. Interestingly, graphic types disallow
alias bounds entirely, as they cannot even be expressed.
The current treatment of alias bounds in x MLF is quite natural in a Churchstyle presentation. Surprisingly, it is also simpler than treating them as in eMLF.
A restriction of x MLF without alias bounds that is closed under reduction and in
closer correspondence with iMLF can still be defined a posteriori, by constraining
the formation of terms, but the definition is contrived and unnatural.
Instead of restricting x MLF to match the expressiveness of iMLF, a fair question is whether the treatment of alias bounds could be enhanced in iMLF—and

26

eMLF—to match the one in x MLF without compromising type inference. This is
worth further investigation.

4.2

Elaboration for other presentations of MLF

We have described the elaboration for the graphical, implicit version of MLF,
since this is the most appropriate version for performing type inference. There
are four presentations of MLF depending on whether types are presented graphically or syntactically and whether annotations are explicit (eMLF) or implicit
(iMLF). Our elaboration can be easily adapted to the three other presentations,
with only minor differences, discussed below.
The graphical explicit version of MLF is obtained by allowing the inverse of
instance operations, but only on inert or rigid nodes. As a result of enlarging
the instance relation, type inference becomes undecidable in iMLF. Still, the
graphical framework of eMLF applies to this variant, and a presolution in eMLF
is also a presolution in iMLF.
Interestingly, presolutions of iMLF can also be elaborated into x MLF, as the
difference between eMLF and iMLF lies in operations on inert and rigid nodes
which are inlined in x MLF. The elaboration proceeds as for eMLF, by weakening presolutions into rigid ones, so that all inert nodes become rigid and will
be inlined. The main difference lies in normalized derivations of instantiation
edges (§3.4), which may contain new forms of operations in iMLF. However,
those operations only occur on rigid nodes and are elaborated into identity type
instantiations.
Translating syntactic versions of MLF (whether implicit or explicit) into
x MLF might seem trivial at a cursory glance. However, this is not the case
at all, and special care must also be taken because of the mismatch between
type instance in MLF and x MLF.
As for graphs, all rigid (in the case of eMLF) and inert types must be inlined,
and types must be put in canonical form (based for instance on some total
ordering of bound variables). This avoids the need for any form of equivalence
or abstraction at places where it is not allowed in x MLF. Furthermore, alias
bounds must also be inlined so as to preserve their intended semantics in MLF
(§4.1).
Once these precautions are carefully taken, the main part of the translation
is however slightly simpler than in the graphical case, because instance derivations, which are the counterpart of instantiation witnesses, are closer to type
instantiation in x MLF. In particular, the ordering of quantifiers has already been
chosen in syntactic eMLF derivations. However, this merely moves the task of
consistently ordering quantifiers from the translation (in the graphical case) to
type inference (in the syntactic case).
A similar translation should also be applicable to the language HML—an
interesting variant of MLF proposed by Leijen (2009) that is even more explicit
than eMLF, but uses the simpler types of iMLF: at the price of adding extra
annotations in source terms, HML needs not use rigid bounds at all. For the
reasons developed above, we do not expect the elaboration for HML to be signif27

icantly simpler than for iMLF or eMLF. However, its proofs of correctness might
be simpler than the proof of correctness for eMLF and itself simpler than the
one for iMLF—since intuitively, the smaller the type equivalence, the simpler
the proof of correctness. Alternatively, programs of HML could be elaborated
indirectly by translating them into eMLF, then into x MLF.

4.3

Related works

Besides the several papers that describe variants of MLF, there are actually few
related works.
Leijen and Löh (2005) have studied the extension of MLF with qualified
types, and as a subcase, the translation of MLF without qualified types into
System F. However, in order to handle type instantiations, a term a of type
∀ (α ⩾ τ ′ ) τ is elaborated as a function of type ∀ (α) (τ⋆′ → α) → τ⋆ , where
τ⋆ is a runtime representation of τ . The first argument is a runtime coercion,
which bears strong similarities with our instantiations. However, an important
difference is that their coercions are at the level of terms, while our instantiations are at the level of types. In particular, although coercion functions should
not change the semantics, this critical result has not been proved so far, while
in our settings the type-erasure semantics comes for free by construction. The
incidence of coercion functions in a call-by-value language with side effects is
also unclear. Perhaps, a closer connection between their coercion functions and
our instantiations could be established and used to actually prove that their
coercions do not alter the semantics. However, even if such a result could be
proved, coercions should preferably remain at the type level, as in our setting,
than be intermixed with terms, as in their proposal.
Interestingly, while their translation and ours work on very different inputs—
syntactic typing derivations in their case, graphic presolutions in ours—there
are strong similarities between the two. The resemblance is even closer with the
improved translation recently proposed by Leijen (2007), in which rigid bindings
are inlined during the translation. As another example, we both canonically
order quantifiers inside types. (However, our motivations are slightly different.
We strive to reduce the number of quantifier reorderings, thus order all the
quantifiers. Leijen uses only a weak canonical form, sufficient to obtain welltyped terms. This can result in some reorderings that are not present in our
translation.)

4.4

Future works

The demand for an internal language for MLF was first made in the context
of using the eMLF type system for the Haskell language. We expect x MLF
to better accommodate qualified types than eMLF since at least no evidence
function would be needed for flexible polymorphism. However, this remains to
be verified.
While graphical type inference has been designed to keep maximal sharing of
types during inference so as to have good practical complexity, our elaboration
28

implementation reads back dags as trees and undo all the sharing carefully
maintained during inference. Even with today’s fast machines, this might be a
problem when writing large, automatically generated programs. Hence, it would
be worth maintaining the sharing during the translation, perhaps by adding type
definitions to x MLF.
It was somewhat of a surprise to realize that x MLF types are actually more
expressive than iMLF ones, because of a different interpretation of alias bounds.
While the interpretation of x MLF seems quite natural in an explicitly typed
context, and is in fact similar to the interpretation of subtype bounds in F<: ,
the eMLF interpretation also seemed the obvious choice in the context of type
inference. We have left for future work the question of whether the additional
power brought by the x MLF could be returned back to eMLF while retaining
type inference.
Type instantiation, which changes the type of an expression without changing its meaning, goes far beyond type application in System F and resembles
retyping functions in System Fη —the closure of F by η-conversion (Mitchell
1988). Those functions can be seen either at the level of terms, as expressions
of System F that βη-reduces to the identity, or at the level of types as a type
conversion. Some loose parallel can be made between the encoding of MLF in
System F by Leijen and Löh (2005) using term-level coercions (which should
hopefully be semantics preserving) and x MLF which uses type-level instantiations (which are semantics preserving by construction). Additionally, perhaps
Fη could be extended with a form of abstraction over retyping functions, much
as type abstraction ∀ (α ⩾ τ ) in x MLF amounts to abstract over the instantiation
!α of type τ → α.
Regarding type soundness, it is also worth noticing that the proof of subject
reduction in x MLF does not subsume, but complements, the one in the original
presentation of MLF. The latter does not explain how to transform type annotations, but shows that annotation sites need not be introduced (only transformed)
during reduction. Because x MLF has full type information, it cannot say anything about type information that could be left implicit and inferred. Thus,
given a term in x MLF, can we rebuild a term in iMLF with minimal type annotations? While this should be easy it we request all subterms to have identical
types, it is not so clear if we only care about typability.
The semantics of x MLF allows reduction (and elimination) of type instantiations a φ through ι-reduction but does not operate reduction (and simplification) of instantiations φ alone. It would be possible to define a notion of
reduction on instantiations φ −→ φ′ (such that, for instance, ∀ (⩾ φ1 ; φ2 ) −→
∀ (⩾ φ1 ); ∀ (⩾ φ2 ), or conversely?) and extend the reduction of terms with a
context rule a φ −→ a φ′ whenever φ −→ φ′ . This might be interesting for more
economical representations of instantiation. However, it is unclear whether there
exists an interesting form of reduction that is both Church-Rosser and large
enough for optimization purposes. Perhaps, one should rather consider instantiation transformations that preserve observational equivalence, which would
leave more freedom in the way one instantiation could be replaced by another.
Less ambitious is to directly generate smaller type instantiations when trans29

lating eMLF presolutions into x MLF, by carefully selecting the instantiation witness to translate—as there usually exists more than one witness for a given
instantiation edge. This amounts to using type derivations equivalence in eMLF
instead of observational equivalence in x MLF. Ideally, the latter should suffice.
In practice, using just the former or the two combined might be simpler.
Extending x MLF to allow higher-order polymorphism is another interesting
research direction for the future. Such an extension is already under investigation for the type inference version eMLF (Herms 2009).

Conclusion
We have completed the MLF trilogy by introducing the Church-style version
x MLF, that was still desperately missing for type-aware compilation and from
a theoretical point of view. The original type-inference version eMLF, which
requires partial type annotations but does not tell how to track them during
reduction, now lies between the Curry-style presentation iMLF that ignores all
type information and x MLF that maintains it during reduction. We have shown
that x MLF is well-behaved: reduction preserves well-typedness, and the calculus
is sound for both call-by-value and call-by-name semantics.
We have described a translation of partially typed eMLF programs into fully
typed x MLF ones. The translation preserves well-typedness and the type erasure
of terms, which ensures the type soundness of eMLF. We have shown that x MLF
can be used as an internal language for MLF, with either call-by-value or callby-name semantics, and also for the many restrictions of MLF that have been
proposed, including HML.
Hopefully, this will help the adoption of MLF and maintain a powerful form
of type inference in modern programming languages that will necessarily feature
first-class polymorphism.
Independently, the idea of enriching type applications to richer forms of type
transformations might also be useful in other contexts.

References
Henk P. Barendregt. The Lambda Calculus: Its Syntax and Semantics. NorthHolland, 1984. ISBN 0-444-86748-1.

⊲ Paolo Herms. Partial Type Inference with Higher-Order Types. Master’s thesis,
University of Pisa and INRIA, 2009. To appear.

⊲ Mark P. Jones. A theory of qualified types. Sci. Comput. Program., 22(3):
231–256, 1994.

⊲ Didier Le Botlan. MLF : An extension of ML with second-order polymorphism
and implicit instantiation. PhD thesis, Ecole Polytechnique, June 2004. english version.

30

⊲ Didier Le Botlan and Didier Rémy. MLF: Raising ML to the power of SystemF. In Proceedings of the Eighth ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on
Functional Programming, pages 27–38, August 2003.

⊲ Didier Le Botlan and Didier Rémy. Recasting MLF. Research Report 6228,
INRIA, Rocquencourt, BP 105, 78 153 Le Chesnay Cedex, France, June 2007.

⊲ Daan Leijen. A type directed translation of MLF to System F. In The International Conference on Functional Programming (ICFP’07). ACM Press,
October 2007.

⊲ Daan Leijen. Flexible types: robust type inference for first-class polymorphism.
In Proceedings of the 36th annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL’09), pages 66–77, New York, NY, USA, 2009.
ACM.

⊲ Daan Leijen and Andres Löh. Qualified types for MLF. In ICFP ’05: Proceedings of the tenth ACM SIGPLAN international conference on Functional
programming, pages 144–155, New York, NY, USA, September 2005. ACM
Press. ISBN 1-59593-064-7.
John C. Mitchell. Polymorphic type inference and containment. Information
and Computation, 2/3(76):211–249, 1988.
Simon Peyton Jones. Haskell 98 Language and Libraries: The Revised Report.
Cambridge University Press, May 2003. ISBN 0521826144.

⊲ Didier Rémy and Boris Yakobowski. From ML to MLF: Graphic type constraints
with efficient type inference. In The 13th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming (ICFP’08), pages 63–74, Victoria, BC,
Canada, September 2008.

⊲ Andrew K. Wright and Matthias Felleisen. A syntactic approach to type soundness. Information and Computation, 1994.

⊲ Boris Yakobowski. Graphical types and constraints: second-order polymorphism
and inference. PhD thesis, University of Paris 7, December 2008.

31

